THE PROPHECY OF JONAS


JONAS prophesied in the reign of JEREBOAM the second: as we learn from
4 Kings 14.25. To whom also he foretold his success in restoring all
the borders of Israel. He was of GETH OPHER in the tribe of ZABULON,
and consequently of GALILEE: which confutes that assertion of the
Pharisees, John 7.52, that no prophet ever rose out of GALILEE. He
prophesied and prefigured in his own person the death and resurrection
of CHRIST: and was the only one among the prophets that was sent to
preach to the Gentiles.


Jonas Chapter 1

Jonas being sent to preach in Ninive, fleeth away by sea: a tempest
riseth: of which he being found, by lot, to be the cause, is cast into
the sea, which thereupon is calmed.

1:1. Now the word of the Lord came to Jonas, the son of Amathi, saying:

1:2. Arise and go to Ninive, the great city, and preach in it: For the
wickedness thereof is come up before me.

Nineve.... The capital city of the Assyrian empire.

1:3. And Jonas rose up to flee into Tharsis from the face of the Lord,
and he went down to Joppe, and found a ship going to Tharsis: and he
paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them to
Tharsis from the face of the Lord,

Tharsis.... Which some take to be Tharsus of Cilicia, others to be
Tartessus of Spain, others to be Carthage.

1:4. But the Lord sent a great wind into the sea: and a great tempest
was raised in the sea, and the ship was in danger to be broken.

1:5. And the mariners were afraid, and the men cried to their god: and
they cast forth the wares that were in the ship, into the sea, to
lighten it of them: and Jonas went down into the inner part of the
ship, and fell into a deep sleep.

A deep sleep.... This is a lively image of the insensibility of
sinners, fleeing from God, and threatened on every side with his
judgments: and yet sleeping as if they were secure.

1:6. And the ship master came to him and said to him: Why art thou fast
asleep? rise up call upon thy God, if so be that God will think of us
that we may not perish.

1:7. And they said every one to his fellow: Come and let us cast lots,
that we may know why this evil is upon us. And they cast lots, and the
lot fell upon Jonas.

1:8. And they said to him: Tell us for what cause this evil is upon us,
what is thy business? of what country art thou? and whither goest thou?
or of what people art thou?

1:9. And he said to them: I am a Hebrew, and I fear the Lord, the God
of heaven, who made both the sea and the dry land.

1:10. And the men were greatly afraid, and they said to him: Why hast
thou done this? (For the men knew that he fled from the face of the
Lord: because he had told them.)

1:11. And they said to him: What shall we do with thee, that the sea
may be calm to us? for the sea flowed and swelled.

1:12. And he said to them: take me up, and cast me into the sea, and
the sea shall be calm to you: for I know that for my sake this great
tempest is upon you.

1:13. And the men rowed hard to return to land, but they were not able:
because the sea tossed and swelled upon them.

1:14. And they cried to the Lord, and said: We beseech thee, O Lord let
us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent blood:
for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee.

1:15. And they took Jonas, and cast him into the sea, and the sea
ceased from raging.

1:16. And the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and sacrificed victims
to the Lord, and made vows.


Jonas Chapter 2

Jonas is swallowed up by a great fish: he prayeth with confidence in
God; and the fish casteth him out on the dry land.

2:1. Now the Lord prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonas: and Jonas
was in the belly of the fish for three days and three nights.

2:2. And Jonas prayed to the Lord, his God, out of the belly of the
fish.

2:3. And he said: I cried out of my affliction to the Lord, and he
heard me: I cried out of the belly of hell, and thou hast heard my
voice.

2:4. And thou hast cast me forth into the deep, in the heart of the
sea, and a flood hath compassed me: all thy billows, and thy waves have
passed over me.

2:5. And I said: I am cast away out of the sight of thy eyes: but yet I
shall see thy holy temple again.

2:6. The waters compassed me about even to the soul: the deep hath
closed me round about, the sea hath covered my head.

2:7. I went down to the lowest parts of the mountains: the bars of the
earth have shut me up for ever: and thou wilt bring up my life from
corruption, O Lord, my God.

2:8. When my soul was in distress within me, I remembered the Lord:
that my prayer may come to thee, unto thy holy temple.

2:9. They that in vain observe vanities, forsake their own mercy.

2:10. But I with the voice of praise will sacrifice to thee: I will pay
whatsoever I have vowed for my salvation to the Lord.

2:11. And the Lord spoke to the fish: and it vomited out Jonas upon the
dry land.

Spoke to the fish.... God’s speaking to the fish, was nothing else but
his will, which all things obey.


Jonas Chapter 3

Jonas is sent again to preach in Ninive. Upon their fasting and
repentance, God recalleth the sentence by which they were to be
destroyed.

3:1. And the word of the Lord came to Jonas the second time saying:

3:2. Arise, and go to Ninive, the great city: and preach in it the
preaching that I bid thee.

3:3. And Jonas arose, and went to Ninive, according to the word of the
Lord: now Ninive was a great city of three days’ journey.

Of three days’ journey.... By the computation of some ancient
historians, Ninive was about fifty miles round: so that to go through
all the chief streets and public places was three days’ journey.

3:4. And Jonas began to enter into the city one day’s journey: and he
cried and said: Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed.

3:5. And the men of Ninive believed in God: and they proclaimed a fast,
and put on sackcloth from the greatest to the least.

3:6. And the word came to the king of Ninive: and he rose up out of his
throne, and cast away his robe from him, and was clothed in sackcloth,
and sat in ashes.

3:7. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published in Ninive, from
the mouth of the king and of his princes, saying: Let neither men nor
beasts, oxen, nor sheep taste anything: let them not feed, nor drink
water.

3:8. And let men and beasts be covered with sackcloth, and cry to the
Lord with all their strength, and let them turn every one from his evil
way, and from the iniquity that is in their hands.

3:9. Who can tell if God will turn, and forgive: and will turn away
from his fierce anger, and we shall not perish?

3:10. And God saw their works, that they were turned from their evil
way: and God had mercy with regard to the evil which he had said that
he would do to them, and he did it not.


Jonas Chapter 4

4:1. And Jonas was exceedingly troubled, and was angry:

Was exceedingly troubled, etc.... His concern was lest he should pass
for a false prophet; or rather, lest God’s word, by this occasion,
might come to be slighted and disbelieved.

4:2. And he prayed to the Lord, and said: I beseech thee, O Lord, is
not this what I said, when I was yet in my own country? therefore I
went before to flee into Tharsis: for I know that thou art a gracious
and merciful God, patient, and of much compassion, and easy to forgive
evil.

4:3. And now, O Lord, I beseech thee take my life from me: for it is
better for me to die than to live.

4:4. And the Lord said: Dost thou think thou hast reason to be angry?

4:5. Then Jonas went out of the city, and sat toward the east side of
the city: and he made himself a booth there, and he sat under it in the
shadow, till he might see what would befall the city.

4:6. And the Lord God prepared an ivy, and it came up over the head of
Jonas, to be a shadow over his head, and to cover him (for he was
fatigued): and Jonas was exceeding glad of the ivy.

The Lord God prepared an ivy.... Hederam. In the Hebrew it is Kikajon,
which some render a gourd: others a palmerist, or palma Christi.

4:7. But God prepared a worm, when the morning arose on the following
day: and it struck the ivy and it withered.

4:8. And when the sun was risen, the Lord commanded a hot and burning
wind: and the sun beat upon the head of Jonas, and he broiled with the
heat: and he desired for his soul that he might die, and said: It is
better for me to die than to live.

4:9. And the Lord said to Jonas: Dost thou think thou hast reason to be
angry, for the ivy? And he said: I am angry with reason even unto
death.

4:10. And the Lord said: Thou art grieved for the ivy, for which thou
hast not laboured, nor made it to grow, which in one night came up, and
in one night perished.

4:11. And shall I not spare Ninive, that great city, in which there are
more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons, that know not how to
distinguish between their right hand and their left, and many beasts?
