# Appendices

## Appendix:Introduction

These texts come from the 1582 Rhemes and 1610 Doway printings of the
portions of the Bible. The primary sources provide a glimpse both into 
the history of
the Douay-Rheims version and the English language itself. The reader
will quickly notice that the letter ‘j’ does not appear in the texts,
rather ‘i’ functions either as a vowel or a consonant. Likewise ‘u’ is
not a distinct letter; it is employed typographically in the lower-case
in place of ‘v’ where not starting a word. The letters ‘u’ and ‘v’ both
function either as vowels or consonants. The word ‘vniuersity’
demonstrates this rule. The letter ‘w’ is often employed, but in many
cases the earlier form of a double-v (vv) appears instead.

The transcriber has done his best to render the text accurately. Note
the relaxed spelling standards of the time; many variants appear. While
the errata section from the 1610 edition observed: “We haue also found
some other faultes of lesse importance; and feare there be more. But we
trust the reader may easely correct them, as they occurre.” only
obvious errors have been amended. Where the transcriber has doubt
between whether an irregular spelling is either an error and a variant,
the printed text stands. 7-bit ASCII cannot fully represent the
typographical standards of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and
many special characters have been replaced with modern equivalents.
Where verse numbers stand in the margins of the printed texts, they
have been transferred to the body; the verse numbers in the ‘Prayer of
Manasses’ have been supplied from other versions. Reference notes have
been transferred from the margins, and their abbreviations modernized.


## Additional Books

The prayer of Manasses, vvith the third & fourth Bookes of Esdras,
extant in most Latin and vulgare Bibles, are here placed after al the
Canonical bookes, of the old Testament: because they are not receiued
into the Canon of Diuine Scriptures by the Catholique Church.


## The Prayer of Manasses King of Iuda, When He Was Held Captive in Babylon

LORD omnipotent God of our fathers, Abraham, & Isaac, and Iacob, and of
their iust sede, (2 Par 33:12) [2] which didst make heauen and earth:
with al the ornamentes of them, [3] which hast bound the sea with the
word of thy precept, which hast shut vp the depth, and sealed it with
thy terrible and laudable name: [4] whom al thinges dread, & tremble at
the countinance of thy powre, [5] because the magnificence of thy
glorie is importable, & the wrath of thy threatning vpon sinners is
intollerable: [6] but the mercie of thy promise is infinite and
vnsearchable: [7] because thou art our Lord, most high, benigne, long
suffering, and very merciful, and penitent vpon the wickednes of men.
Thou Lord according to the multitude of thy goodnes hast promised
penance, and remission to them that haue sinned to thee, and by the
multitude of thy mercies thou hast decreed penance to sinners, vnto
saluation. [8] Thou therfore Lord God of the iust, hast not appointed
penance to the iust, Abraham, & Isaac and Iacob, them that haue not
sinned to thee, but hast appointed penance for me a sinner: [9] because
I haue sinned aboue the number of the sand of the sea. Myne iniquities
Lord be multiplied, mine iniquities be multiplied, and I am not worthie
to behold, & looke vpon the height of heauen, for the multitude of mine
iniquities. [10] I am made crooked with manie a band of yron, that I
can not lift vp my head, and I haue not respiration: because I haue
stirred vp thy wrath, and haue done euil before thee: I haue not done
thy wil, and thy commandmentes I haue not kept: I haue set vp
abominations, and multiplied offenses. [11] And now I bowe the knee of
my hart, beseeching goodnes of thee. [12] I haue sinned Lord, I haue
sinned, & I acknowlege myne iniquities. [13] Wherefore I beseech
disiring thee, forgeue me Lord, forgeue me: and destroy me not together
with myne iniquities, neither reserue thou for euer, being angrie,
euils for me, neither damme me into the lowest places of the earth:
because thou art Lord, God, I say, of the penitent: [14] in me thou
shalt shew al thy goodnes because thou shalt saue me vnworthie
according to thy great mercie, [15] and I wil prayse thee alwayes al
the dayes of my life: because al the power of the heauens prayseth
thee, and to thee is glorie for euer and euer. Amen.

## The Third Book of Esdras

### The Third Book of Esdras:Introduction

For helpe of the readers, especially such as haue not leysure to read
al, vve haue gathered the contentes of the chapters; but made no
Annotations: because the text it self is but as a Commentarie to the
Canonical bookes; and therfore we haue only added the concordance of
other Scriptures in the margin.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 1

Iosias king of Iuda maketh a great Pasch, 7. geuing manie hostes to
such as wanted for sacrifice: 14. the Priestes and Leuites performing
their functions therin: 22. in the eightenth yeare of his reigne, 25.
He is slayne in battel by the king of AEgypt, 32. and much lamented by
the Iewes. 34. His sonne Ieconias succedeth. 37. After him Ioacim, 40.
who is deposed by the king of Babylon. 43. Ioachim reigneth three
monethes, and is caried into Babylon. 46. Sedecias reigneth eleuen
yeares wickedly. 52. and he with his people is caried captiue into
Babylon, the citie and temple are destroyed. 57. so remayned til the
Monarchie of the Persians.

AND Iosias made a Pasch in Ierusalem to our Lord & immolated the Phase
the fourtenth moone of the moneth: (4 Kings 23:21 / 2 Par 35:1) 2
appointing the Priestes by courses of dayes clothed with stoles in the
temple of our Lord. 3 And he spake to the Leuites the sacred seruantes
of Isreal, that they should sanctifie them selues to our Lord in the
placing of the holie arke of our Lord in the house, which king Salomon
sonne of Dauid built. 4 It shal not be for you to take it vpon your
shoulders. And now serue your Lord, and take the care of that nation
Israel, in part according to your villages and tribes, 5 according to
the writing of Dauid king of Israel, and according to the magnificence
of Salomon his sonne, al in the temple, and according to your fathers
portion of principalitie, among them that stand in the sight of your
brethren the children of Isreal. 6 Immolate the Pasch, and prepare the
sacrifices for your bretheren, and doe according to the precept of our
Lord which was geuen to Moyses. (Ex 12
/ Lev 23 / Num 28) 7 And Iosias gaue vnto the people that was found of
/ sheepe,
lambes, and kiddes, and goates thirtie thousand, calues there thousand.
8 These thinges were geuen to the people of the kinges goodes according
to promisse: and to the priestes for the Phase, sheepe in number two
thousand, and calues an hundred. 9 And Iechonias, and Semeias, and
Nathanael bretheren, and Hasabias, and Oziel, and Coraba for the Phase
sheepe fiue thousand, calues fiue hundred. 10 And when these thinges
were done in good order, the Priestes an the Leuites stood hauing
azymes by tribes. 11 And according to the portions of their fathers
principalitie, in the sight of the people they did offer, to our Lord
according to those thinges, which were written in the booke of Moyses:
12 and rosted the Phase with fire as it ought: and the hostes they
boyled in cauldrons, and in pottes with beneuolence: 13 and they
brought to al that were of the people: and afterward they prepared for
them selues and the priestes. 14 For the Priestes offered the fatte,
vntil the houre was ended: and the Leuites prepared for them selues,
and their brethren, the children of Aaron. 15 And the sacred singing
men, the children of Asaph were by order according to the precept of
Dauid and Asaph, and Zacharias, and Ieddimus, which was from the king.
16 And the porters at euerie gate, so that none transgressed his owne:
for their brethren prepared for them. 17 And the thinges were
consummate that perteyned to the sacrifice of our Lord. 18 In that day
they celebrated the Phase, and offered hostes vpon the sacrifice of our
Lord, according to the precept of king Iosias. 19 And the children of
Israel, that were found at that time, celebrated the Phase: and the
festiual day of Azymes for seuen dayes: 20 and there was not celebrated
such a Phase in Isreal, from the times of Samuel the prophet: 21 and al
the kinges of Israel did not celebrate such a Phase as Iosias did, and
the Priestes, and the Leuites, and the Iewes, and al Israel, that were
found in their abode at Ierusalem. 22 In the eightenth yeare, Iosias
reigning was the Phase celebrated. 23 And the workes of Iosias were
directed in the sight of his Lord in a hart ful of feare: 24 and the
thinges concerning him are writen in the ancient times, touching them
that sinned, and were irreligous against our Lord aboue al nations, and
that sought not the wordes of our Lord vpon Israel. 25 And after al
this fact of Iosias, came vp Pharao the king of AEgypt comming in
Charcamis from the way vpon Euphrates, and Iosias went forth to meete
him. (4 Kings 23:29 / 2 Par 35:20) 26 And the king of AEgypt sent to
Iosias saying: What is there betwen me & thee king of Iuda? 27 I was
not sent of the Lord to fight against thee: for my battel is vpon
Euphrates, goe downe in hast. 28 And Iosias did not returne vpon his
chariote: but endeuoured to ouerthrow him, not attending the word of
the prophet from the mouth of our Lord: 29 but he made battel against
him in the field of Mageddo. And princes went downe to king Iosias. 30
And the king said to his seruantes: Remoue me from the battel, for I am
weakned excedingly. And forthwith his seruantes remoued him out of the
battel. 31 And he went vp into his second chariote: & comming to
Ierusalem, dyed, and was buried in his fathers sepulchre. 32 And in al
Iurie they mourned for Iosias, & the rulers with their wiues lamented
him vntil this day. And this was geuen out to be done alwayes vnto al
the stocke of Israel. 33 But these thinges were writen before in the
booke of the histories of the kinges of Iuda: and al the actes of the
doing of Iosias, and his glorie and his vnderstanding in the law of our
Lord: and the thinges that were done by him, and that are not writen in
the booke of the kinges of Israel and Iuda. 34 And they that were of
the nation, taking Iechonias the sonne of Iosias, made him king for
Iosias his father, when he was three and twentie yeares old. (4 Kings
23:30 / 2 Par 36:1) 35 And he reigned ouer Israel three monethes. And
the king of AEgypt remoued him, that he should not reigne in Ierusalem:
36 and he put a taxe vpon the nation of siluer an hundred talentes, and
of gold one talent. 37 And the king of AEgypt made Ioacim his brother
king of Iuda and Ierusalem: 38 and he bound the magistrates of Ioacim,
and Zaracel his brother, and taking them brought them backe into
AEgypt. 39 Ioacim was fiue and twentie yeares old when he began to
reigne in the land of Iuda and Ierusalem: and he did euil in the sight
of our Lord. 40 And after this man came vp Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon, and binding him with a bande of brasse, brought him into
Babylon. 41 And Nabuchodonosor tooke the sacred vessels of our Lord,
and carried away, and consecrated them in his temple in Babylon. 42 For
his vncleanes, and lacke of religion is written in the booke of the
times of the kinges. 43 And Ioachin his sonne reigned for him. And when
he was made king, he was eightene yeares old. 44 And reigned three
monethes and ten dayes in Ierusalem, and did euil in the sight of our
Lord: 45 and after a yeare Nabuchodonosor sending, transported him into
Babylon together with the sacred vessels of our Lord. (4 Kings 24:13)
46 And he made Sedecias king of Iuda and Ierusalem, when he was one and
twentie yeares old: (4 Kings 24:17) and he reigned eleuen yeares. 47
And he did euil in the sight of our Lord, and was not afraid of the
wordes which were spoken by Ieremie the prophet from the mouth of our
Lord: (Jer 37:2) 48 and being sworne of king Nabuchodonosor, forsworne
he did reuolt: and his necke being hardened, & his hart, he
transgressed the ordinances of our Lord the God of Israel. 49 And the
princes of the people of our Lord did manie thinges wickedly, and they
did impiously aboue al the vncleannes of the nations: and they polluted
the temple of our Lord that was holie of Ierusalem. 50 And the God of
their fathers sent by his messenger to reclame them, for that he would
spare them, and his tabernacle. 51 But they scorned at his messengers:
and in the day that our Lord spake to them, they were mocking his
prophetes. 52 Who was moued euen vnto wrath vpon his nation for their
impietie, and commanded the kinges of the Chaldees to come vp. 53 These
slewe their yong men with the sword, round about their holie temple,
and spared not yong man, and old man, and virgin, and youth: 54 but al
were deliuered into their handes: & taking al the sacred vessels of our
Lord, and the kinges treasures, they caried them into Babylon, 55 and
burnt the house of our Lord, and threwe downe the walles of Ierusalem:
and the towres therof they burnt with fire, 56 and consumed al their
honorable thinges, and brought them to naught, and those that were left
of the sword, they led into Babylon. 57 And they were his seruants
vntil the Persians reigned in the fulfilling of the word of our Lord by
the mouth of Ieremie: (Jer 25:12 / Jer 29:10 / Dan 9:2) 58 as long as
the land quietly kept her sabbathes, al the time of her desolation she
sabbathized in the application of seuentie yeares.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 2

Cyrus king of Persia permitteth the Iewes to returne into their
countrie: 10. and deliuereth to them the holie vessels, which
Nabuchodonosor had taken from the temple. 16. Certaine aduersaries
writing to king Artaxerxes, hinder those that would repayre the ruines
of Ierusalem.

CYRVS king of the Persians reigning for the accomplishment of the word
of our Lord by the mouth of Ieremie, (2 Par 36:22 / 1 Esd 1:1 / 1 Esd
6:3 / Jer 25:12
/ Jer 29:10 / Dan 9:2) 2 our Lord raysed vp the spirit of Cyrus king of
/ the
Persians, and he proclaymed in al his kingdomes, and that by writing, 3
saying: Thus sayth Cyrus king of the Persians: The Lord of Israel, the
high Lord, hath made me king ouer the whole earth. 4 and hath signified
to me to build him a house in Ierusalem, which is in Iurie. 5 If there
be any of your kinred, his Lord goe vp with him into Ierusalem. 6
Whosoeuer therefore dwel about the places, let them helpe them that are
in the same place, in gold and siluer, 7 in giftes, with horses, and
beastes, and with other thinges which by vowes are added into the
temple of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem. 8 And the princes of the
tribes, of the villages and of Iurie, of the tribe of Beniamin, & the
Priestes, and the Leuites standing vp, whom our Lord moued to goe vp,
and to build the house of our Lord which is in Ierusalem, and they that
were round about them, 9 did helpe them with al their gold and siluer,
and beastes, and manie whose minde was stirred vp, with many vowes. 10
And Cyrus the king brought forth the sacred vessel of our Lord, which
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon transported out of Ierusalem, and
consecrated them to his Idol. 11 And Cyrus the king of Persians
bringing them forth, deliuered them to Mithridatus, who was ouer his
treasures. 12 And by him they were deliuered to Salmanasar president of
Iurie. 13 And of these this was the number: Cuppes for libamentes of
siluer two thousand foure hundred, basens of siluer thirtie: phials of
gold thirtie, also of siluer two thousand foure hundred: and other
vessels a thousand. 14 and al the vessels of gold and siluer, were fiue
thousand eight hundred sixtie. 15 And they were numbered to Salmanasar
together with them, that came out of the captiuite of Babylon into
Ierusalem. 16 But in the times of Artaxerxes king of the Persians,
there wrote to him of them that dwelt in Iurie and Ierusalem, Balsamus,
and Mithridatus, and Sabellius, and Rathimus, Balthemus, Sabellius
scribe, and the rest dweling in Samaria, and other places the epistle
folowing to king Artaxerxes. (1 Esd 4:7) 17 SIR, thy seruantes Rathimus
ouer occurrentes, and Sabellius the scribe, and the other iudges of thy
court in Caelesyria, and Phenice. 18 And now be it knowen to our Lord
the king, that Iewes came vp from you to vs, coming into Ierusalem a
rebellious, & very naughty citie, do build the fornaces thereof, and
set vp the walles, and rayse the temple. 19 And if this citie, and the
walles shal be finished, they wil not onlie not abyde to pay tributes,
but also wil resist the kinges. 20 And because that is in doing about
the temple, we thought it should doe wel not to neglect this same
thing: 21 but to make it knowen to our Lord the king, that if it shal
seme good, o king it may be sought in the bookes of thy fathers, 22 and
thou shalt find in the recordes, thinges writen of these, and thou
shalt know that this citie hath bene rebellious, and trubling kinges,
and cities, 23 and the Iewes rebelles, & making battels in it from time
out of mind, for the which cause this citie was made desolate. 24 Now
therfore we doe thee to vnderstand, Lord king, that if this citie shal
be built, and the walles therof shal be erected, there wil be no
comming downe for thee into Caelesyria, & Phenice. 25 Then wrote the
king to Rathimus, the writer of the occurrentes, and to Balthemus, and
to Sabellius the scribe, and to the rest ioyned with them, and to the
dwellers in Syria, and Phenice, as foloweth: 26 I haue read the epistle
that you sent me. I commanded therfore search to be made, & it was
found that the same citie is from the beginning rebellious to kinges,
27 and the men rebelles, and making battels in it, & there were most
valient kinges ruling in Ierusalem, and exacting tributes in
Caelesyria, & Phenice. 28 Now therfore I haue geuen commandment to
forbid those men to build the citie, and to stay them that nothing be
done more then is: 29 and that they proceeded not farder, wherof are
euils, so that there may be truble brougt vpon the kinges. 30 Then
these things being read which were writen of king Artaxerxes, Rathimus,
and Sabellius the scribe, and they that were apointed with them ioyning
together in hast came to Ierusalem with a troupe of horsemen, and
multitude, & companie: 31 and they begane to forbid the builders, and
they ceased from building of the temple in Ierusalem, til in the second
yeare of the reigne of Darius king of the Persians.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 3

After a solemne supper made to al the court, and chief princes, king
Darius sleeping: 4. three esquires of the bodie keeping watch, proposed
the question: 10. VVhether wine, or a King, or wemen, or the truth doth
excel? 17. The first prayseth wine.

KING Darius made a great supper to al his domestical seruantes, and to
al the magistrates of Media and Persia, 2 and to al that were purple,
and to the praetors, and counsuls, and liuetenantes vnder him from
India vnto AEthiopia, an hundred twentie seuen prouinces. 3 And when
they had eaten and drunken, and returned ful, then Darius went vp into
his chamber, and slept, and awaked. 4 Then those three youngmen kepers
of his bodie, which garded the kings bodie, sayd one to an other; 5 Let
euerie one of vs say a word that may excel: & whose word soeuer shal
appeare wiser then the others, to him wil king Darius geue great
giftes, 6 to be couered with purple, & to drinke in gold, and to sleepe
vpon gold, & a chariote with a bridle of gold, & a bonet of silke, and
a cheyne about his necke: 7 and he shal sit in the second place next
Darius for his wisdome. And he shal be called the cosin of Darius. 8
Then euerie one writing his word signed it, and they put it vnder the
pillow of Darius the king, 9 and they sayd. When the king shal rise, we
wil geue him our writinges: and which soeuer of the three the king shal
iudge, and the magistrates of Persia, that his word is the wiser, to
him shal the victorie be geuen as is writen. 10 One wrote: Wine is
strong. 11 An other wrote, a King is stronger. 12 The third wrote,
Wemen are more strong: but aboue al thinges truth ouercometh. 13 And
when the king was risen, they tooke their writinges, and gaue him, and
he read. 14 And sending he called al the Magistrates of Persians, and
the Medes, and them that weare purple, and the pretors, and the
ouerseers; 15 and they sate in the councel: and the writinges were read
before them. 16 And he sayd: Cal the youngmen, and they shal declare
their owne wordes. And they were called, and went in. 17 And he sayd to
them: Declare vnto vs concerning these thinges which are writen. And
the first began, he that had spoken of the strength of wine, 18 and
sayd: O ye men, how doth wine preuaile ouer al men that drinke! it
seduceth the minde. 19 And also the mind of king and orphane it maketh
vaine. Also of the bondman and the free, of the rich man and the poore,
20 and euerie mind it turneth into securitie and pleasantnes, and it
remembreth not any sorow and dewtie, 21 and al hartes it maketh honest,
and it remembreth not king, nor magistrate, and it maketh a man speake
al thinges by talentes. 22 And when they haue drunke, they remember not
frendship, nor brotherhood: yea and not long after they take swordes.
23 And when they are recouered and risen from the wine, they remember
not what they haue done. 24 O ye men, doth not wine excel? who thinketh
to doe so? And hauing sayd this, he held his peace.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 4

The second prayseth the excellencie of a king: 13. The third (which is
Zorobabel) commendeth wemen: 33. but preferreth truth aboue al. 41.
VVhich is so approued, and he is rewarded. 42. The king moreouer at his
request restoreth the holie vessels of the temple, and granteth meanes
to build the citie of Ierusalem, and the temple.

AND the next began to speake, he that spake of the strength of a king.
2 O ye men doe not the men excel, which obteyne land and sea, and al
thinges that are in them? 3 But a king excelleth aboue al thinges, and
hath dominion ouer them: and euerie thing whatsoeuer he shal say to
them, they doe. 4 And if he send them to warryers, they goe, and throw
downe mountaines, and the walles, and towers. 5 They kil, and are
killed: and the kinges word they transgresse not. For if they shal
ouercome, they bring to the king al thinges whatsoeuer they haue taken
for a praye. 6 In like maner also al others, for so many as are not
souldiars, nor fight, but til the ground: when they shal reape, againe
they bring tributes to the king. 7 And he being one onlie if he say:
Kil ye, they kil: say he: forgeue, the forgeue. 8 say he: strike: they
strike: say he, destroy, they destroy: say he build, they build. 9 say
he, cut downe, they cut downe, say he plant, they plant: 10 and al the
people, & potestates here him, and beside this he sitteth downe, and
drinketh, and sleepeth. 11 And others gard him round about, and can not
goe euerie one, and doe their owne workes, but at a word are obedient
to him. 12 O ye men, how doth not a king excel that is so renowmed? And
he held his peace. 13 The third that spake of wemen and truth, this is
Zorobabel, began to speake. 14 O ye men, not the great king, & many
men, neither is it wine that dothe excel. Who is it then that hath the
dominion of them? 15 Haue not wemen brought forth the king, and al the
people, that ruleth ouer land & sea: 16 and were they not borne of
them, and did not they bring vp them which planted the vineyardes,
whereof wine is made? 17 And they make the garmentes of al men, & they
doe honor to al men, and men can not be separed from wemen. 18 If they
haue gathered gold and siluer, and euerie beutiful thing, & see a woman
comelie and fayre, 19 leauing al these thinges they fixe their looke
vpon her, & with open mouth beholde her, and allure her more then gold
and siluer, and euerie precious thing. 20 Man forsaketh his father that
brought him vp, and his countrie, and ioyneth himself to a woman. 21
And with a woman he refresheth his soul: and neither doth he remember
father, nor mother, nor countrie. 22 And hereby you must know that
wemen rule ouer you. Are you not sorie? 23 And a man taketh his sword,
& goeth into the way to commit theftes and murders, & to sayle seas &
riuers, 24 and seeth a lyon, and goeth in darkenes: and when he hath
committed theft, and fraude, and spoyles, he bringeth it to his
beloued. 25 And againe, man loueth his wife more then father or mother.
26 And many haue become madde for their wiues: and haue been made
bondmen for them: 27 and many haue perished and bene slayne, and haue
sinned for wemen. 28 And now beleue me, that the king is great in his
powre: because al countries are afrayd to touch him. 29 Neuertheles I
saw Apemes the daughter of Bezaces the concubine of a meruelous king,
sitting by the king at his right hand, 30 and taking of the crowne from
his head, and putting it vpon her self, and with the palme of her left
hand she stroke the king. 31 And beside these thinges he with open
mouth beheld her: and if she smiled he laugheth, and if she be angrie
with him, he flattereth, til he be reconciled to her fauour. 32 O ye
men, why are not wemen stronger? Great is the earth, and high is the
heauen: who doeth these thinges? 33 And then the king and they that
weare purple looked one vpon an other. And he began to speake of truth.
34 O ye men, are not wemen strong? The earth is great and heauen is
high: & the swift course of the sunne turneth the heauen round into his
place in one day. 35 Is not he magnifical that doth these thinges, and
the truth great, and stronger aboue al thinges? 36 Al the earth calleth
vpon the truth, heauen also blesseth it, and al workes are moued, and
tremble at it, and there is not any thing with it vniust. 37 Wine is
vniust, the king is vniust, wemen are vniust, al the sonnes of men are
vniust, and al their workes are vniust, and in them is not truth, and
they shal perish in their iniquitie: 38 and truth abydeth, and groweth
strong for euer, and liueth, and preuayleth for euer and euer. 39
Neither is there with it acception of persons, nor differences: but the
thinges that are iust it doth to al men, to the vniust and malignant,
and al men are wel pleased in the workes thereof. 40 And there is no
vniust thing in the iudgement therof, but strength, and reigne, and
power, and maiestie of worldes. Blessed be the God of truth. 41 And he
left speaking. And al the people cryed, and sayd: Great is truth and it
preuaileth. 42 Then the king sayd to him: Aske, if thou wilt any more,
then the thinges that are writen, and I wil geue it thee, according as
thou art found wiser then thy neighbours, & thou shalt sitte next to
me, and shalt be called my cosin. 43 Then sayd he to the king: Be
midful of thy vow, which thou hast vowed, to build Ierusalem in the day
that thou didst receiue the kingdom: 44 and to send backe al the
vessels that were taken out of Ierusalem, which Cyrus separated, when
he sacked Babylon, and would haue sent them backe thither. 45 And thou
hast vowed to build the temple, which the Idumeians burnt, when Iurie
was destroyed of the Chaldees. 46 And now this is that which I aske
Lord, & which I desire, this is the maiestie which I desire of thee,
that thou performe the vowe which thou hast vowed to the king of heauen
by thy mouth. 47 Then Darius the king rising vp, kissed him: and wrote
letters to al the officers, and ouerseers, and them that weare purple,
that they should conduct him, and them that were with him, al going vp
to build Ierusalem. 48 And to al the ouerseers that were in Syria, and
Phoenice, and Libanus he wrote letters, that they should draw Ceder
trees from Libanus into Ierusalem, to build the citie with them. 49 And
he wrote to al the Iewes which went vp from the kingdome into Iurie for
libertie, euerie mightie man, & magistrate, & ouerseer not to come vpon
them to their gates, 50 and al the countrie which they had obtayned to
be free vnto them, & that the Idumeians leaue the castels which they
possesse of the Iewes, 51 and to the building of the temple to geue
euerie yeare twentie talentes vntil it were throughly built: 52 & vpon
the altars to burne holocausts dayly, as they haue commandment: to
offer other ten talentes euery yeare, 53 & to al that go forth from
Babylon to build the citie, that there should be libertie as wel to
them as to their children, and to al the priestes that goe before. 54
And he wrote a quantitie also, and commanded the sacred stole to be
geuen, wherein they should serue; 55 and to the Leuites he wrote to
geue preceptes, vntil the day wherein the house shal be finished, and
Ierusalem builded. 56 And to al that kepe the citie, he wrote portions
and wages to be geuen to them. 57 And he sent away al the vessels
whatsoeuer Cyrus had separated from Babylon, and al thinges whatsoeuer
Cyrus sayd, he also commanded to be donne, and to be sent to Ierusalem.
58 And when that yong man was gone forth, lyfting vp his face toward
Ierusalem, he blessed the king of heauen, 59 & sayd: Of thee is
victorie, and of thee is wisdome, and glorie. And I am thy seruant. 60
Blessed art thou which hast geuen me wisedom, and I wil confesse to
thee Lord God of our fathers. 61 And he toke the letters, and went into
Babylon. And he came, and told al his brethren that were in Babylon: 62
and they blessed the God of their fathers, because he gaue them
remission and refreshing, 63 that they should goe vp and build
Ierusalem, and the temple wherein his name was renowmed, and they
reioyced with musike and ioy seuen dayes.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 5

Those that returned from captiuitie of Bablyon into Ierusalem, and
Iurie, are recited. 47. They restore Gods seruice: 66. but are hindered
from building.

AFTER these thinges there were chosen, to goe vp the princes of townes
by their houses, and tribes, and their wiues, and their sonnes and
daughters, and their men seruantes and wemen seruantes, and their
cattel. (1 Esd 2:1) 2 And Darius the king sent together with them a
thousand horsmen, til they conducted them to Ierusalem with peace, &
with musicke & with tymbrels, and shaulmes: 3 and al the brethren were
playing, and he made them goe vp together with them. 4 And these are
the names of the men that went vp by their townes according to tribes,
and according to the portion of their principalitie. 5 Priestes: The
children of Phinees, the sonne of Aaron, Iesus the sonne of Iosedec,
Ioacim the sonne of Zorobabel, the sonne of Salatheil of the house of
Dauid, of the progenie of Phares, of the tribe of Iuda. 6 Who spake
vnder Darius king of the Persians the meruelous wordes in the second
yeare of his reigne the first moneth Nisan. 7 And they are these, that
of Iurie came vp from the captiuitie of the transmigration, whom
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon transported into Babylon, and
returned into Ierusalem. (1 Esd 2:2 / 2 Esd 7:6) 8 And euerie one
sought a part of Iurie according to his owne citie, they that came with
Zorobabel, and Iesus, Nehemias, Areores, Elimeo, Emmanio, Mardocheo,
Beelsuro, Mechpsatochor, Olioro, Emonia one of their princes. 9 And the
number of them of the same nation, of their rulers the children of
Phares, two thousand an hundred seuentie two: 10 The children of Ares,
three thousand an hundred fiftie seuen: 11 The children of Phoemo, an
hundred fourtie two: in the children of Iesus and Ioabes, a thousand
three hundred two: 12 the children of Demu, two thousand foure hundred
seuentie: the children of Choraba, two hundred fiue: the children of
Banica, an hundred sixtie eight, 13 the children of Bebech, foure
hundred three: the children of Archad, foure hundred twentie seuen: 14
the children of Cham, thirtie seuen: the children of Zoroar, two
thousand sixtie seuen: the children of Adin, foure hundred sixtie one:
15 the children of Aderectes, an hundred eight: the children of Ciaso
and Zelas an hundred seuen: the children of Azoroc, foure hundred
thirtie nine: 16 the children of Iedarbone, an hundred thirtie two: the
children of Ananias, an hundred thirtie: the children of Asoni,
ninetie: 17 the children of Marsar, foure hundred twentie two: the
children of Zabarus, nintie fiue: the children of Sepolemon, an hundred
twentie three: 18 the children of Nepopas, fiftie fiue: the children of
Hechanatus, an hundred fiftie eight: the children of Cebethamus, an
hundred thirite two: 19 the children of Crearpatros, which are of
Enocadie and Modia, foure hundred twentie three: they of Gramas and
Babea, an hundred twentie one. 20 They of Besselon, and Ceagge, sixtie
fiue: they of Bastraro, an hundred twentie two: 21 they of Bechenobes,
fiftie fiue: the children of Liptis, an hundred fiftie fiue: the
children of Labonni, three hundred fiftie seuen: 22 the children of
Sichem, three hundred seuentie: the children of Suadon, & Cliomus,
three hundred seuentie eight: 23 the children of Ericus, two thousand
an hundred fourtie fiue: the children of Anaas, three hundred seuentie.
The priestes: 24 the children of Ieddus, the sonne of Euther, the sonne
of Eliasib, three hundred seuenty two: the children of Emerus, two
hundred fiftie two: 25 the children of Phasurius, three hundred fiftie
seuen the children of Caree, two hundred twentie seuen. 26 The Leuites:
The children of Iesus in Caduhel, and Bamis, and Serebias, and Edias,
seuentie foure, the whole number from the twelfth yeare, thiritie
thousand foure hundred sixtie two. 27 The sonnes, and daughters, and
wiues, the whole number, fourtie thousand two hundred fourtie two. 28
The children of the Priestes, that sang in the temple: the children of
Asaph, an hundred twentie eight. 29 And the porters: the children of
Esmeni, the children of Azer, the children of Amon, the children of
Accuba, of Topa, the children of Tobi, al an hundred thirtie nine. 30
Priestes that serued in the temple: the children of Sel, the children
of Gaspha, the children of Tobloch, the children of Caria, the children
of Su, the children of Hellu, the children of Lobana, the children of
Armacha, the children of Accub, the children of Vtha, the children of
Cetha, the children of Aggab, the children of Obai, the children of
Anani, the children of Canna, the children of Geddu, 31 the children or
An, the children of Radin, the children of Desanon, the children of
Nachoba, the children of Caseba, the children of Gaze, the children of
Ozui, the children of Sinone, the children of Attre, the children of
Hasten, the children of Asiana, the children of Manei, the children of
Nasissim, the children of Acusu, the children of Agista, the children
of Azui, the children of Fauon, the children of Phasalon, 32 the
children of Meedda, the children of Phusa, the children of Caree, the
children of Burcus, the children of Saree, the children of Coesi, the
children of Nasith, the children of Agisti, the children of Pedon. 33
Salomon his children, the children of Asophot, the children of Phasida,
the children of Celi, the children of Dedon, the children of Gaddehel,
the children of Sephegi, 34 the children of Aggia, the children of
Sachareth, the children of Sabathen, the children of Caroneth, the
children of Malsith, the children of Ama, the children of Sasus, the
children of Addus, the children of Suba, the children of Eura, the
children of Rahotis, the children of Phasphat, the children of Malmon.
35 Al that serued the sanctuarie, and the seruantes of Salomon, foure
hundred eightie two. 36 These are the children that came vp from
Thelmela, Thelharsa: the princes of them, Carmellam, and Careth: 37 and
they could not declare their cities, and their progenies, how they are
of Israel. The children of Dalari, the children of Tubal, the children
of Nechodaici, 38 of the Priestes, that did the function of priesthood:
and there were not found the children of Obia, the children of Achisos,
the children of Addin, who tooke a wife of the daughters of Pargeleu:
39 and they were called by his name, and the writing of the kinred of
these was sought in the register, and it was not found, and they were
forbid to doe the function of priesthood. 40 And Nehemias and Astharus
sayd to them: Let not the holie thinges be participated, til there
arise a hiegh priest lerned for declaration and truth. 41 And al Israel
was beside men seruantes, and wemen seruantes, fourtie two thousand
three hundred fourtie. 42 Their men seruantes and wemen seruantes,
seuen thousand three hundred thirtie seuen. Singing men and singing
wemen, two hundred three score fiue. 43 Camels, foure hundred thiritie
fiue. Horses, seuen thousand thirtie six. Mules, two hundred thousand
fourtie fiue. Beastes vnder yoke, fiue thousand twentie fiue. 44 And of
the rulers themselues by their villages, when they came into the temple
of God, which was in Ierusalem, to renew and raise vp the temple in his
place, according to their power: 45 and to be geuen into the temple to
the sacred treasure of the workes, of gold twelue thousand mnas, and
fiue thousand mnas of siluer, and stoles for Priestes an hundred. 46
And the Priestes and Leuites, and they that came out of the people,
dwelt in Ierusalem, and in the countrie, and the sacred singingmen, and
porters, and al Israel in their countries. 47 And the seuenth moneth
being at hand, and when the children of Israel were euerie man in his
owne affayres, they came together with one minde into the court, that
was before the east gate. (1 Esd 3:1) 48 And Iesus the sonne of
Iosedec, and his brethren the priestes: Zorobabel the sonne of
Salathiel, and his brethren standing vp, prepared an altar, 49 that
they might offer vpon it holocaustes, according to the thinges that are
writen in the booke of Moyses the man of God. 50 And there assembled
there of other nations of the land, and al the nations of the land
erected the altar in his place, and they offered hostes, and morning
holocaustes to our Lord. 51 And they celebrated the feast of
Tabernacles, and the solemne day, as it is commanded in the lawe: and
sacrifices dayly, as it behoued: 52 and after these the appointed
oblations, and the hostes of the sabbathes, and of the newmoones, and
of al the solemne sanctified dayes. 53 And as manie as vowed to our
Lord from the new moone of the seuenth moneth, began to offer the
hostes to God, and the temple of our Lord was not yet built. 54 And
they gaue monie to the masones and workemen, and drinke and victuals
with ioy. 55 And they gaue cartes to the Sidonians, and Tyrianes, that
with them they should carie ceder beames from Lybanus, and should make
boates in the hauen Ioppe, according to the decre that was writen for
them by Cyrus king of the Persians. 56 And in the second yeare coming
into the temple of God in Ierusalem, in the second moneth began Zorobel
the sonne of Salathiel, and Iosue the sonne of Iosedec, and their
bretheren, and the Priestes and Leuites, and al that were come from the
captiuitie into Ierusalem. 57 and they founded the temple of God in the
newmoone of the second moneth of the second yeare, after that they came
into Iurie and Ierusalem. 58 And they appoynted the Leuites from
twentie yeares, ouer the workes of our Lord: and Iesus stood and his
sonne, and the bretheren, al Leuites ioyning together, & executors of
the lawe, doing the workes in the house of our Lord. 59 And al the
Priestes stood, hauing stoles with trumpettes: 60 and Leuites the
children of Asaph, hauing cymbals together praysing our Lord, and
blessing him according to Dauid king of Israel. 61 And they song a song
to our Lord, because his sweetenes, and honour is for euer vpon Israel.
62 And al the people sounded with trumpet, and cried out with a loud
voice, praysing our Lord in the raysing vp of the house of our Lord. 63
And there came of the Priestes and Leuites, and presidentes by their
villages the more ancientes, which had sene the old house: 64 and to
the building of this with crie and great lamentation, and manie with
trumpettes and great ioy: 65 in so much that the people heard not the
trumpettes for the lamentatinon of the people. For the multitude was
sounding with trumpettes magnifically, so that it was heard far of. 66
And the enimes of the tribe of Iuda, and Beniamin heard it, and they
came to knowe what the voyce of the trumpettes was: 67 And they knew
that they which were of the captiuitie doe build a temple to our Lord
the God of Israel. 68 And coming to Zorobabel & Iesus, the ouerseers of
the villages, they sayd to them: We will build together with you: (1
Esd 4:2) 69 For we haue in like maner heard your Lord, & we walke like
from the dayes of Asbazareth king of the Assyrians, who transported vs
hither. 70 And Zorobabel, and Iesus, & the princes of the villages of
Israel, sayd to them: 71 It is not for vs and you to build the house of
our God. For we alone wil build to our Lord of Israel according as
Cyrus the king of the Persians hath commanded. 72 And the nations of
the land lying vpon them that are in Iurie, and lifting vp the worke of
the building, and bringing ambushmentes, and peoples, prohibited them
to build. 73 and practising assaultes hindred them, that the building
might not be finished al the time of the life of king Cyrus, and they
differred the building for two yeares vntil the reigne of Darius.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 6

The Iewes by assistance of king Darius build vp the Temple in
Ierusalem.

AND in the second yeare of the reigne of Darius prophecied Aggeus, and
Zacharias the sonne of Addo the prophet to Iurie and Ierusalem in the
name of God of Israel vpon them. (1 Esd 5:1) 2 Then Zorobabel the sonne
of Salathiel standing vp, and Iesus the sonne of Iosedec begane to
build the house of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem. 3 When the
prophetes of our Lord were present with them, and did helpe them. At
the same time came Sisennes to them, the deputie of Syria, and of
Phenice, and Satrabuzanes, and his felowes: 4 and they sayd to them: By
whose commandment, build ye this house, and this roofe, and perfite al
other thinges? And who are the workmen that build these thinges? 5 And
the ancientes of the Iewes, which were left of the captiuitie by our
Lord, had fauoure when the visitation was made vpon them. 6 And they
were not hindered from building, til it was signified to Darius of al
these thinges, and answer was receiued. 7 A copie of the letter, which
they sent to Darius. SISENNES deputie of Syria and Phenice, and
Satrabuzanes, and his felowes in Syria and Phenice presidents, to king
Darius greetings: 8 Be al thinges knowen to our Lord the king, that
when we came into the countrie of Iurie, and had entered into
Ierusalem, we found them building the great house of God. 9 And the
temple of polished stones, and of great and precious matter in the
walles. 10 And the workes to be a doing earnestly, and to succede, and
prosper in their handes, and in al glorie to be perfited most
diligently. 11 Then we asked the ancients saying, by whose permission
build ye this house, & found these workes? 12 And therfore we asked
them, that we might doe thee to know the men & the ouerseers, and we
required of them a rolle of the names of the ouerseers. 13 But they
answered vs saying: We are the seruantes of the Lord, which made heauen
and earth. 14 And this house was built these manie yeares past by a
king of Israel, that was great and most valiant, and was finished. 15
And because our fathers were prouoking to wrath, and sinned agaynst God
of Israel, he deliuered them into the handes of Nabuchodonosor the king
of Babylon, king of the Chaldees. 16 And throwing downe this house they
burnt it, and they led the people captiue into Babylon. 17 In the first
yeare when Cyrus reigned the king of Babylon, Cyrus the king wrote to
build this house. 18 And these sacred vessels of gold and siluer which
Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the house which is in Ierusalem, and
had consecrated them in his owne temple, Cyrus brought them forth
agayne out of the temple which was in Babylon, and they were deliuered
to Zorobabel, & to Salmanasar the deputie. 19 And it was commanded them
that they should offer these vessels, & lay them vp in the temple,
which was in Ierusalem, and build the temple of God itself in his
place. 20 Then did Salmanasar lay the fundations of the house of our
Lord, which is in Ierusalem: and from that time vntil now it is a
building, and is not accomplished. 21 Now therfore if thou thincke it
good o king, let it be sought in the kings liberaries of Cyrus the
king, which are in Babylon: 22 and if it shal be found, that the
building of the house of the Lord, which is in Ierusalem, begane by the
counsel of Cyrus the king, and it be thought good of our Lord the king,
let him write to vs of these thinges. 23 Then Darius the king commanded
search to be made in the libraries: and there was found in Ecbatana a
towne that is in the countrie of Media, one place wherin were writen
these wordes: (1 Esd 6:1) 24 IN THE FIRST YEARE of the reigne of Cyrus,
king Cyrus commanded to build the house of the Lord which is in
Ierusalem, where they did burne incense with dayly fire, 25 the height
wherof shal be of ten cubits, & the bredth three score cubites, foure
square with three stones polished, and with a loft galerie of wood of
the same countrie, & one new galerie, and the expenses to be geuen out
of the house of Cyrus the king. 26 And the sacred vesseles of the house
of the Lord, as wel of gold as of siluer, which Nabuchodonosor tooke
from the house of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem where they were
layed, that they be put there: 27 And he commanded Sisennes the deputie
of Syria & Phoenice, and Satrabuzanes, and his felowes & them that were
ordayned presidentes in Syria & Phoenice, that they should refraine
themselues from that place. 28 And I also haue geuen commandment to
build it wholly: and haue prouided, that they helpe them, which are of
the captiuitie of the Iewes, til the temple of the house of the Lord be
accomplished. 29 And from the vexation of the tributes of Coelesyria &
Phoenice, a quantitie to be geuen diligently to these men for the
sacrifice of the Lord, to Zorobabel the gouernour, for oxen, and
rammes, and lambes. 30 And in like maner corne also, and salt, and
wine, and oyle continually yeare by yeare, according as the priestes
which are in Ierusalem, haue prescribed to be spent dayly: 31 that
libamentes may be offered to the most high God for the king & his
children, & that they may pray for their life. 32 And that it be
denounced, that whosoeuer shal transgresse anie thing of these which
are writen, or shal despise it, a beame be taken of theyr owne, & they
be hanged, & their goodes be confiscate to the king. 33 Therfore the
Lord also, whose name is inuocated there, destroy euery king & nation,
that shal extend their hand to hinder or to handle il the house of the
Lord which is in Ierusalem. 34 I Darius the king haue decreed that it
be most diligently done according to these thinges.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 7

The house of God is finished, 7. and dedicated, 10. the feast of Pasch
is also celebrated seuen dayes with Azimes.

THEN Sisennes the deputie of Coelesyria, and Phaenice, and
Satrabuzames, and their felowes, obeying those thinges which were
decreed of Darius the king, (1 Esd 6:13) 2 applied the sacred workes
most diligently, working together with the ancientes of the Iewes, the
princes of Syria. 3 And the sacred workes prospered, Aggeus & Zacharias
the prophetes prophecying. 4 And they accomplished al thinges by the
precept of our Lord the God of Israel, and by the counsel of Cyrus, &
Darius, and Artaxerxes the king of the Persians. 5 And our house was a
finishing vntil the three and twentith day of the moneth of Adar, the
sixth yeare of Darius the king. 6 And the children of Israel, and the
Priestes and Leuites, and the rest that were of the captiuitie, which
were added did according to those thinges that are written in the booke
of Moyses. 7 And they offered for the dedication of the temple of our
Lord, oxen an hundred, rammes two hundred, lambes foure hundred. 8 And
kiddes for the sinnes of al Israel, twelue, according to the number of
the tribes of Israel. 9 And the Priestes and Leuites stood clothed with
stoles by tribes, ouer al the workes of our Lord the God of Israel,
according to the booke of Moyses, and the porters at euerie gate. 10
And the children of Israel, wih them that were of the captiuitie
celebrated the phase of the fourtenth moone of the first moneth, when
the Priestes and Leuites were sanctified. 11 Al the children of the
captiuitie were not sanctified together, because al the Leuites were
sanctified together. 12 And al the children of the captuitie immolated
the phase, both for their brethren the Priestes, and for them selues.
13 And the children of Israel did eate, they that were of the
captiuitie al that remayned apart from al the abominations of the
nations of the land seeking our Lord. 14 And they celebrated the
festiual day of Azymes seuen dayes feasting in the sight of our Lord.
15 Because he turned the counsel of the king of the Assirians toward
them, to strengthen their handes to the workes of our Lord the God of
Israel.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 8

Esdras going from Babylon to Ierusalem, 9. carieth king Artaxerxes
fauourable letters, 14. with licence to take gold, siluer, and al
thinges necessarie at their pleasure. 31. The chief men that goe with
him are recited. 51. He voweth a fast praying for good success in their
iorney. 56. weigheth the gold and siluer, which he deliuereth to the
Priestes, and Leuites. 69. And seuerely admonisheth the people to
repentance, for their mariages made with infideles.

AND after him when Artaxerxes king of the Persians reigned, came Esdras
the sonne of Azarias, the sonne of Helcias the sonne of Salome, (1 Esd
7:1) 2 the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Achitob, the sonne of Ameri,
the sonne of Azahel, the sonne of Bocci, the sonne of Abisue, the sonne
of Phinees the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron the first priest. 3
This Esdras came vp from Babylon being scribe & wise in the law of
Moyses, which was geuen of our Lord the God of Israel to teach and to
doe. 4 And the king gaue him glorie, because he had found grace in al
dignitie and desire in his sight. 5 And there went vp with him of the
children of Israel, and the Priestes, and the Leuites, and the sacred
singers of the temple, and the porters, and the seuantes of the temple
into Ierusalem. 6 In the seuenth yeare when Artaxerxes reigned in the
fifth moneth, this is the seuenth yeare of his reigne, going forth of
Babylon in the newmoone of the fifth moneth, 7 they came to Ierusalem
according to his commandment, according to the prosperitie of their
iourney, which their Lord gaue them. 8 For in these Esdras had great
knowlege, that he would not pretermitte anie of those thinges, which
were according to the law, and the preceptes of our Lord, and in
teaching al Israel al iusticie and iudgement. 9 And they that wrote the
writinges of Araxerxes the king, coming deliuered the writing which was
granted of Artaxerxes the king to Esdras the Priest, & the reader of
the law of our Lord, the copie wherof here foloweth. 10 KING Artaxerxes
to Esdras the Priest, and reader of the law of the Lord, greeting. 11 I
of curtesie esteming it among benifites, haue commanded them that of
their owne accord are desirous of the nation of the Iewes, and of the
Priestes and Leuites, which are in my kingdom, to goe with thee into
Ierusalem. 12 If anie therfore desire to goe with thee, let them come
together, and set forward as it hath pleased me, and my seuen freindes
my counselers: 13 that they may visite those thinges which are done
touching Iurie and Ierusalem, obseruing as thou hast in the law of the
Lord. 14 And let them carie the giftes to the Lord the God of Israel,
which I haue vowed and my freindes to Ierusalem, and al the gold and
siluer, that shal be found in the countrie of Babylon to the Lord in
Ierusalem, with that, 15 which is geuen for the nation it self vnto the
temple of their Lord which is in Ierusalem: that this gold and siluer
be gathered for oxen, and rammes, and lambes, and kiddes, and for the
thinges that are agreable to these, 16 that they may offer hostes to
the Lord vpon the altar of their Lord, which is in Ierusalem. 17 And al
thinges whatsoeuer thou with thy brethren wilt doe with gold and
siluer, doe it at thy pleasure according to the precept of the Lord thy
God. 18 And the sacred vessels, which are geuen thee to the workes of
the house of the Lord thy God, which is in Ierusalem. 19 And other
thinges whatsoeuer shal helpe thee to the workes of the temple of thy
God, thou shalt geue it out of the kings treasure. 20 When thou with
thy brethren wilt doe ought with gold and siluer, doe according to the
wil of the Lord. 21 And I king Artaxerxes haue geuen commandment to the
keepers of the treasure of Syria and Phaenice, that what thinges soeuer
Esdras the Priest and reader of the law of the Lord, shal write for,
they geue him vnto an hundred talentes of siluer, likewise also of
gold. 22 And vnto an hundred measures of corne, & an hundred vessels of
wine, and other thinges whatsoeuer abound without taxing. 23 Let al
thinges be done to the most high God according to the law of God, lest
perhaps there arise wrath in the reigne of the king, and of his sonne,
and his sonnes. 24 And to you it is sayd, that vpon al the Priestes,
and Leuites, and sacred singers, and seruantes of the temple, & scribes
of this temple 25 no tribute, nor any other taxe be sette, and that no
man haue auctoritie to obiect any thing to them. 26 But thou Esdras
according to the wisedom of God appoynt iudges, and arbitrers in al
Syria and Phaenice: and teach al them that know no the law of thy God:
27 that whosoeuer shal transgresse the law, they be diligently punished
either with death, or with torment, or els with a forfeite of money, or
with banishment. 28 And Esdras the scribe sayd: Blessed be the God of
our fathers, which hath geuen this wil into the kings hart, to glorifie
his house, which is in Ierusalem. 29 And hath honoured me in the sight
of the king, and of his counselers, and freindes, and them that weare
purple. 30 And I was made constant in minde according to the ayde of
our Lord my God, and gathered together of Israel men, that should goe
vp together with me. 31 And these are the princes according to their
kindredes, and seueral principalities of them that came vp from Babylon
the kingdom of Artaxerxes. (1 Esd 8:1) 32 Of the children of Phares,
Gerfomus: and of the children of Siemarith, Amenus: of the children of
Dauid, Acchus the sonne of Scecilia: 33 Of the children of Phares,
Zacharias, and with him returned an hundred fiftie men. 34 Of the
children of leader Moabilion, Zaraei, and with him two hundred fiftie
men: 35 Of the children of Zachues, Iechonias of Zechoel, and with him
two hundred fiftie men: 36 of the children of Sala, Maasias of
Gotholia, & with him seuentie men: 37 of the children of Saphatia,
Zarias of Michel, and with him eightie men: 38 of the children of Iob,
Abdias of Iehel, and with him two hundred twelue men: 39 of the
children of Bania, Salimoth, the sonne of Iosaphia, and with him an
hundred sixtie men: 40 of the children of Beer, Zacharias Bebei, and
with him two hundred eight men: 41 of the children of Ezead, Ioannes of
Eccetan, and with him an hundred ten men: 42 of the children of
Adonicam, which were last, and these are their names, Eliphalam the
sonne of Gebel, and Semeias, and with him seuentie men. 43 And I
gathered them together to the riuer that is called Thia, and we camped
there three dayes, and vewed them againe. 44 And of the children of the
Priestes and Leuites I found not there. 45 And I sent to Eleazarus, and
Eccelon, and Masman, and Maloban, and Enaathan, and Samea, and Ioribum,
Nathan, Enuaugam, Zacharias, and Mosolam the leaders them selues, and
that were skilful. 46 And I sayd to them that they should come to
Loddeus, who was at the place of the treasurie. 47 And I commanded them
to say to Loddeus, and his brethren, and to them that were in the
treasurie, that they should send vs them that might doe the function of
priesthood in the house of the Lord our God. 48 And they brought vnto
vs according to the mightie hand of the Lord our God cunning men: of
the children of Moholi, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Israel,
Sebebia, & his sonnes and brethren, which were eightene: 49 Asbia, and
Amin of the sonnes of the children of Chananeus, and their children
twentie men. 50 And of them that serued the temple, whom Dauid gaue,
and the princes themselues to the ministerie of the Leuites of them
that serued the temple, two hundred twentie. Al their names were
signified in writings. 51 And I vowed there a fast to the yong men in
the sight of God, that I might aske of him a good iourney for vs, and
them that were with vs, and for the children, and the cattel because of
ambushementes. 52 For I was ashamed to aske of the king footemen and
horsemen in my companie, to guard vs, against our aduersaries. 53 For
we sayd to the king that the power of our Lord wil be with them that
seeke him with al affection. 54 And agayne we besought the Lord our God
according to these thinges: whom also we had propicious, and we
obteyned of our God. 55 And I separated of the rulers of the people,
and of the Priestes of the temple, twelue men, and Sedebia, and Asanna,
and with them of their brethren ten men. 56 And I weyed to them the
gold and siluer, and the vessels of the house of our God perteyning to
the Priestes, which the king had geuen, and his counselers, and the
princes, and al Israel. 57 And when I had weyed it, I deliuered of
siluer an hundred fiftie talentes, and siluer vessels of an hundred
talentes, and of gold an hundred talentes. 58 And of vessels of gold
seuen score and twelue brasen vessels good of shyning brasse,
resembling the forme of gold. 59 And I sayd to them: You are also
sanctified to our Lord, and the vessels be holie, and the gold and
siluer is vowed to our Lord the God of our fathers. 60 Watch and keepe,
til you deliuer them to some of the rulers of the people, and to the
Priestes, and Leuites, and to the princes of the cities of Israel in
Ierusalem, in the treasurie of the house of our God. 61 And those
Priestes and Leuites that receiued the gold and siluer and vessels,
brought it to Ierusalem into the temple of our Lord. 62 And we went
forward from the riuer Thia, the twelfth day of the first moneth, til
we entred into Ierusalem. 63 And when the third day was come, in the
fourth day the gold being weyed, and the siluer, was deliuered in the
house of the Lord our God, to Marimoth Priest the sonne of Iori. 64 And
with him was Eleazar the sonne of Phinees: and with them were Iosadus
the sonne of Iesus, and Medias, and Banni the sonne of a Leuite, by
number and weight al thinges. 65 And the weight of them was writen the
same houre. 66 And they that came out of the captiuitie, offered
sacrifice to our Lord the God of Israel, oxen twelue, for al Israel,
rammes eightie six, 67 lambes seuentie two, bucke goates for sinne
twelue, and for health twelue kyne, al for the sacrifice of our Lord.
68 And they read againe the preceptes of the king to the kinges
officers, and to the deputies of Coelesyria, and Phoenice: and they
honored the nation, and the temple of our Lord. 69 And these thinges
being finished, the rulers came to me, saying: The stocke of Isreal,
and the princes, and the Priestes, and the Leuites, (1 Esd 9:1) 70 and
the strange people, and nations of the land haue not separated their
vncleannes from the Chananeites, and Hetheites, and Pherezeites, and
Iebuseites, and Moobites, & AEgyptians, and Idumeians. 71 For they are
ioyned to their daughters both themselues, and their sonnes: and the
holie sede is mingled with the strange nations of the earth, and the
rulers and magistrates were partakers of that iniquitie from the
beginning of the reigne it self. 72 And forthwith as I heard these
thinges, I rent my garmentes and sacred tunike: and tearing the heares
of my head, and my beard, I sate sorowful and heauie. 73 And there
assembled to me mourning vpon this iniquitie, as manie as were then
moued by the word of our Lord the God of Israel, and I sate sad vntil
the euening sacrifice. 74 And I rising vp from fasting, hauing my
garmentes rent and the sacred tunike, kneeling, and stretching forth my
handes to our Lord, 75 I sayd: Lord I am confounded, and ashamed before
thy face, 76 for our sinnes are multiplied ouer our heades, and our
iniquities are exalted euen to heauen. 77 Because from the times of our
fathers we are in great sinne vnto this day. 78 And for the sinnes of
vs, and of our fathers we haue bene deliuered with our brethren, and
with our Priestes to the kinges of the earth, into sword and
captiuitie, and spoile with confusion vnto this present day. 79 And now
what a great thing is this that mercie hath happened to vs from thee o
Lord God, & leaue thou vnto vs a roote, and a name in the place of thy
sanctification, 80 to discouer our light in the house of the Lord our
God, to geue vs meate in al the time of our bondage. 81 And when we
serued, we were not forsaken of the Lord our God: but he sette vs in
fauour, appointing the kinges of the Persians to geue us meate, 82 and
to glorifie the temple of the Lord our God, and to build the
desolations of Sion, to geue vs stabilitie in Iurie, and Ierusalem. 83
And now what say we Lord, hauing these thinges? For we haue
transgressed thy preceptes, which thou gauest into the handes of thy
seruantes the prophetes, 84 saying: That the land into which ye entred
to possesse the inheritance therof, is a land polluted with the
coinquinations of the strangers of the land, and their vncleanes hath
filled it wholy with their filthines. 85 And now your daughters you
shal not match with their sonnes, and their daughters you shal not take
for your sonnes. 86 And you shal not seeke to haue peace with them for
euer, that growing strong you may eate the best things of the land, and
may distribute the inheritance to your children for euer. 87 And the
thinges that happen to vs, al are done for our nauhtie workes, and our
great sinnes. 88 And thou gauest vs such a roote, and we are returned
againe to transgresse thy ordinances, that we would be mingled with the
vncleannes of the nations of this land. 89 Wilt not thou be wrath with
vs to destroy vs, til there be no roote left nor our name? 90 Lord God
of Israel thou art true. For there is a roote left vntil this present
day. 91 Behold, now we are in thy sight in our iniquities. For it is
not to stand any longer before thee in these matters. 92 And when
Esdras with adoration confessed weeping, lying flat on the ground
before the temple, there were gathered before him out of Ierusalem a
verie great multitude, men and wemen, and yong men and yong wemen. For
there was great weeping in the multitude it self. (1 Esd 10:1) 93 And
when he had cried, Iechonias of Ieheli of the children of Israel, sayd
to Esdras: We haue sinned against our Lord, for that we haue taken vnto
vs in mariage strange wemen of the nations of the land. 94 And now thou
art ouer al Israel, in these therfore let there be an othe from our
Lord to expel al our wiues that are of strangers with their children.
95 As it was decreed to thee of the ancesters according to the law of
our Lord, rising vp declare it. 96 For to thee the busines perteineth,
and we are with thee: doe manfully. 97 And Esdras rysing vp adiured the
princes of the Priestes and Leuites, and al Israel to doe according to
these thinges and they sware.

### The Third Book of Esdras Chapter 9

Esdras fasting for the sinnes of the people, commandeth that they
separate al strange wemen from them. 18. The Priestes and Leuites,
which had offended herein, are recited. 38 He readeth the law before
the people: 48 certaine doe expound to the multitudes in seueral
places. 52 And so they are dismissed with ioy.

AND Esdras rysing vp from before the court of the temple, went into the
chamber of Ionathas the sonne of Nasabi. (1 Esd 10:6) 2 And lodging
there he tasted no bread, nor dranke water for the iniquitie of the
multitude. 3 And there was proclamation made in al Iurie, & in
Ierusalem to al that were of the captiuitie gathered in Ierusalem, 4
that whosoeuer shal not appeare with in two or three dayes, according
to the iudgement of the ancients sitting vpon it, their goods should be
taken away, and himselfe should be iudged an alien from the multitude
of the captiuitie. 5 And al were gathered that were of the tribe of
Iuda, and of Beniamin within three dayes in Ierusalem: this is the
ninth moneth, the twentith day of the moneth. 6 And al the multitude
sate in the court of the temple trembling, for the present winter. 7
And Esdras rysing vp sayd to them: You haue done vnlawfully taking to
you in mariage strang wiues, that you might adde to the sinnes of
Israel. 8 And now geue confession, & magnificence to our Lord the God
of our fathers: 9 and accomplish his wil, and depart from the nations
of the land, and from your wiues the strangers. 10 And al the multitude
cried, and they sayd with a lowde voice: As thou hast sayd, we wil doe.
11 But because the multitude is great, and winter time, and we can not
stand in the ayre without succour: and this is a worke for vs not of
one day, nor of two, for we haue sinned much in these thinges: 12 Let
the rulers of the multitude stand, and that dwel with vs, and as manie
as haue with them forreine wiues, 13 and at a time appointed let the
priestes out of euerie place, and the iudges assist, vntil they appeaze
the wrath of our Lord concerning this busines. 14 And Ionathas the
sonne of Ezeli, and Ozias of Thecam tooke vpon them according to these
wordes: and Bosoramus, and Leuis, and Sabbathaeus, wrought together
with them. 15 And al that were of the captiuitie stood according to al
these thinges. 16 And Esdras the priest chose vnto him men the great
princes of their fathers according to their names: & they sate together
in the newmoone of the tenth moneth to examine this busines. 17 And
they determined of the men that had outlandish wiues, vntil the
newmoone of the first moneth. 18 And there were found of the priestes
entermingled that had outlandish wiues. 19 Of the sonnes of Iesus the
sonne of Iosedec, and his brethren: Maseas, and Eleazarus, and Ioribus,
and Ioadeus, 20 and they put to their handes to expel their wiues: and
to offer a ramme to obtayne pardon for their ignorance. 21 And the
sonnes of Semmeri: Maseas and Esses, Ieelech, and Azarias. 22 And of
the children of Fofere: Limosias, Hismaenis, and Nathanee, Iussio,
Reddus, and Thalsas. 23 And of the Leuites: Iorabdus, and Semeis, and
Colnis, and Calitas, and Facteas, and Coluas, and Eliomas, 24 and of
the sacred singing men, Eliasib, Zaccarus. 25 And of the porters,
Salumus, and Tolbanes. 26 And of Israel: of the sonnes of Foro, Ozi,
and Remias, and Geddias, & Melchias, and Michelus, Eleazarus, and
Iammebias, and Bannas. 27 And of the sonnes of Iolaman: Chamas, and
Zacharias, and Iezuelus, and Ioddius, and Erimoth, and Helias. 28 And
of the sonnes of Zathoim: Eliadas, and Liasumus, Zochias, and Larimoth,
& Zabdis, and Thebedias. 29 And of the sonnes of Zebes: Ioannes, and
Amanias, and Zabdias, and Emeus. 30 And of the sonnes of Banni: Olamus,
& Maluchus, and Ieddeus, and Iasub, and Azabus, & Ierimoth. 31 And of
the sonnes of Addin: Nathus, and Moosias, & Caleus, and Raanas,
Maaseas, Mathathias, and Beseel, and Bonnus, and Manasses. 32 And of
the sonnes of Nuae: Noneas, and Aseas, and Melchias, and Sameas, and
Simon, Beniamin, and Malchus, and Marras. 33 And of the sonnes of Asom:
Carianeus, Mathathias, & Bannus, & Eliphalach, and Manasses, and Semei.
34 And of the sonnes of Banni: Ieremias, and Moadias, and Abramus, &
Iohel, and Baneas, & Pelias, and Ionas, and Marimoth, & Eliasib, and
Matheneus, and Eliasis, and Orizas, and Dielus, and Semedius, &
Zambris, and Iosephus. 35 And of the sonnes of Nobei: Idelus, and
Mathathias, and Sabadus, and Zecheda, Zedmi, and Iessei, Baneas. 36 Al
these maried outlandish wiues, and did put them away with their
children. 37 And the Priestes and the Leuites, and they that were of
Israel, dwelt in Ierusalem, and in the whole countrie in the newmoone
of the seuenth moneth. And the children of Israel were in their
habitations. 38 And al the multitude was gathered together into the
court, which is on the east of the sacred gate: 39 and they sayd to
Esdras the high priest, and reader, that he should bring the law of
Moyses, which was deliuered of our Lord the God of Israel. 40 And
Esdras the high priest brought the law to al the multitude of them from
man vnto woman, and to al the priestes to heare the law in the newmoone
of the seuenth moneth. 41 And he read in the court, which is before the
sacred gate of the temple, from breake of day vntil euening before men
and wemen. And they al gaue their minde to the law. 42 And Esdras the
priest, and reader of the law stoode vpon a tribunal of wood, which was
made. 43 And by him stood Mathathias, and Samus, and Ananias, Azarias,
Vrias, Ezechias, and Balsamus on the right hand, 44 and on the left
Faldeus, Misael, Malachias, Ambusthas, Sabus, Nabadias, and Zacharias.
45 And Esdras tooke the booke before al the multitude: for he was
chiefe in glorie in the sight of al. 46 And when he had ended the law,
they stood al vpright: and Esdras blessed our Lord the most high God,
the God of Sabaoth omnipotent. 47 And al the people answered: Amen. And
lifting vp their handes falling on the ground, they adored our Lord. 48
Iesus and Banaeus, and Sarebias, and Iaddimus, and Accubus, and
Sabbathaeus, and Calithes, & Azarias, and Ioradus, and Ananias, and
Philias Leuites, 49 who taught the law of our Lord, and read the same
in the multitude, & euerie one preferred them that vnderstood the
lesson. 50 And Atharathes sayd to Esdras the high priest and the
reader, and to the Leuites, that taught the multitude, 51 saying: This
day is sancitified to our Lord. And they al wept, when they had heard
the law. 52 And Esdras sayd, departing therfore eate ye al the fattest
thinges, & drinke al most swete things, and send giftes to them that
haue not. 53 For this is the holy day of our Lord, & be not sad. For
our Lord wil glorifie you. 54 And the Leuites denounced openly to al,
saying: This day is holie, be not sad. 55 And they went al to eate, and
drinke, and make merie, and to geue giftes to them that had not, that
they might make merie, for they were excedingly exalted with the wordes
that they were taught. 56 And they were al gathered in Ierusalem to
celebrate the ioy, according to the testament of our Lord the God of
Israel.

## The Fourth Book of Esdras

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 1

Esdras is sent to expostulate with the vngratful Iewes for neglecting
Gods manie great benefites.

THE second book of Esdras the prophet, the sonne of Sarei, the sonne of
Azarei, the sonne of Helcias, the sonne of Sadanias, the sonne of
Sadoch, the sonne of Achitob, (1 Esd 7:1) 2 the sonne of Achias, the
sonne of Phinees, the sonne of Heli, the sonne of Amerias, the sonne of
Asiel, the sonne of Marimoth, the sonne of Arna, the sonne of Ozias,
the sonne of Borith, the sonne of Abisei, the sonne of Phinees, the
sonne of Eleazar, 3 the sonne of Aaron of the tribe of Leui; who was
captiue in the countrie of the Medes, in the reigne of Artaxerxes king
of the Persians. 4 And the word of our Lord came to me, saying: 5 Goe,
and tel my people their wicked deedes, and their children the
iniquities, that they haue done against me, that they may tel their
childrens children: 6 because the sinnes of their parentes are
increased in them, for they being forgetful of me haue sacrified to
strange goddes. 7 Did not I bring them out of the land of AEgypt from
the house of bondage? But they haue prouoked me, & haue despised my
counsels. 8 But doe thou shake of the heare of thy head, and throw al
euils vpon them: because they haue not obeyed my law. And it is a
people without discipline. 9 How long shal I beare with them, on whom I
haue bestowed so great benefiates? 10 I haue ouer throwen manie kinges
from them. I haue stroke Pharao with his seruantes, and al his hoste.
(Ex 14) 11 Al nations did I destroy before their face, & in the East I
dissipated the peoples of two prouinces Tyre and Sidon, and I slew al
their aduersaries. 12 But speake thou to them, saying: Thus sayth our
Lord: 13 I made you passe through the sea, and gaue you fensed streates
from the beginning. I gaue you Moyses for your gouernour, and Aaron for
the Priest: 14 I gaue you light by the piller of fire, & did manie
meruelous things among you: but you haue forgotten me, sayth our Lord.
(Ex 13) 15 Thus sayth our Lord omnipotent: The quayle was a signe to
you, I gaue you a campe for defense, and there you murmured: 16 And you
triumphed not in my name for the destruction of your enemies, but yet
vntil now you haue murmured. (Ex 16) 17 Where are the benefites, that I
haue geuen you? Did you not crie out to me when you were hungrie in the
desert, 18 saying: Why hast thou brought vs into this desert to kil vs?
it had bene better for vs to serue the AEgyptians, then to dye in this
desert. (Num 14) 19 I was sorie for your mournings, & gaue you manna to
eate. You did eate bread of Angels. (Ex 16 / Wis 16:20) 20 When you
thirsted did not I cleaue the rocke, & waters flowed in abundance? for
the heates I couered you with the leaues of trees. 21 I deliuered vnto
you fatte landes: The Chananeites, and Pherezeites, and Philistheans I
threw out from your face: what shal I yet doe to you, sayth our Lord?
(Isa 9:4) 22 Thus sayth our Lord omnipotent: In the desert when you
were thirstie in the riuer of the Amorrheites, and blasphemeing my
name, (Ex 15:25) 23 I gaue you not fire for blasphemies, but casting
wood into the water, I made the riuer swete. 24 What shal I doe to thee
Iacob? Thou wouldest not obey o Iuda. I wil transferre my self to other
nations, and wil geue them my name, that they may keepe my ordinances.
(Ex 32) 25 Because you haue forsaken me, I aslo forsake you: when you
aske mercie of me, I wil not haue mercie. (Isa 1:15) 26 When you shal
inuocate me, I wil not heare you. For you haue defiled your handes with
bloud, and your fete are quicke to commit murders. 27 Not as though you
haue forsaken me, but yourselues, sayth our Lord. 28 Thus saith our
Lord omnipotent, haue not I desired you, as a father his sonnes, and a
mother her daughters, and as a nurce her litle ones, 29 that you would
be my people, and I your God, and to me for children, and I to you for
a father? 30 So haue I gathered you, as the henne her chickenes vnder
her winges. But now what shal I doe to you? I wil throw you from my
face. (Matt 23:37) 31 When you shal bring me oblation, I wil turne away
my face from you. (Isa 66:5) For I haue refused your festiual dayes, &
newmoones, and circumcisions. 32 I sent my seruantes the prophetes to
you, whom being taken you slew, and mangled their bodies, whose bloud I
wil require, sayth our Lord. 33 Thus sayth our Lord omnipotent, your
house is made desolate, I wil throw you away, as the winde doth
stubble, 34 and your children shal not haue issue: because they haue
neglected my commandment, and haue done that which is euil before me.
35 I wil deliuer your houses to a people comming, who not hearing me do
beleue: to whom I haue not shewed signes, they wil do the thinges that
I haue commanded. 36 The prophetes they haue not sene, and they wil be
mindful of their iniquities. 37 I cal to witnes the grace of the people
comming, whose litle ones reioyce with ioy, not seing me with their
carnal eyes, but in spirit beleuing the thinges that I haue sayd. 38
And now brother behold what glorie: and see people comming from the
east, 39 to whom I wil geue the conduction of Abraham, Isaac, and
Iacob, and of Osee, and Amos, and of Ioel, and Abdias, and Ionas, and
Michaeas, 40 and Naum and Habacuc, of Sophonias, Aggaeus, Zacharias,
and Malachias, who also is called the Angel of our Lord. (Mal 3:1)

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 2

The Synagogue expostulateth with her children for their ingratitude;
10. shewing that they shal be forsaken, and the gentiles called.

THVS saith our Lord: I brought this people out of bondage, to whom I
gaue commandment by my seruantes the Prophetes, whom they would not
heare, but made my counsel frustrate. 2 Their mother that bare them,
sayth to them: Goe children, because I am a wydow and forsaken. 3 I
brought you vp with ioy, & haue lost you with mourning & sorow, because
you haue sinned before our Lord your God, & haue done that which is
euil before him. 4 But now what shal I doe to you? I am a wydow and
desolote, goe my children, & aske mercie of our Lord. 5 And I cal thee
o father a witnes vpon the mother of the children, that would not keepe
my testament, 6 that thou geue them confusion, & their mother into
spoile, that there be no generation of them. 7 Let their names be
dispersed into the Gentiles, let them be destroyed out of the land:
because they haue despised my sacrament. 8 Woe be to thee Assur, which
hidest the wicked with thee. Thou naughtie nation, remember what I did
to Sodom & Gomorrha: (Gen 19:24) 9 whose land lieth in cloddes of
pitch, & heapes of ashes: so wil I make them, that haue not heard me,
saith our Lord omnipotent. 10 Thus saith our Lord to Esdras: Tel my
pople, that I wil geue them the kingdom of Ierusalem, which I ment to
geue to Isreal. 11 And I wil take to me the glorie of them, and wil
geue them eternal tabernacles, which I had prepared for them. 12 The
wood of life shal be to them for an odour of oyntment, and they shal
not labour, nor be wearied. 13 Goe & you shal receiue. Aske for your
selues a few dayes, that they may abide. Now the kingdom is prepared
for you, watch ye. 14 Cal thou heauen and earth to witnes: for I haue
destroyed euil, and haue created good, because I liue sayth our Lord.
15 Mother embrace thy children, bring them vp with ioy. As a doue
confirme their feete: because I haue chosen thee, sayth our Lord. 16
And I wil raise againe the dead out of their places, and out of the
monumentes I wil bring them forth, because I haue knowen my name in
Israel. 17 Feare not o mother of the children, because I haue chosen
thee, saith our Lord. 18 I wil send thee ayde, my seruantes I saie, and
Ieremie, at whose counsel I haue sanctified, and prepared for thee
tweleue trees loden with diuerse fruites, 19 and as manie fountaines
flowing milke and honie: and seuen huge mountaines, hauing the rose and
the lilie, in the which I wil fil thy children with ioy. (Ex 15:27) 20
Iustifie thou the widow, iudge for the pupil, geue to the needie,
defend the orphane, cloth the naked, 21 cure the broken & feeble, mocke
not the lame, defend the maimed, and admitte the blind to the vision of
my glorie. 22 The old man & the yong keepe with in thy walles: 23 where
thou shalt finde the dead, committe them to the graue signing it, & I
wil geue thee the first seate in my resurrection. (Tob 1:20) 24 Pause
and rest my people, because thy rest shal come. 25 As a good nurce
nourish thy children, confirme their feete. 26 The seruantes that I
haue geuen thee, none of them shal perish. For I wil require them of
thy number. 27 Be not wearied. For when the day of affliction and
distresse shal come, others shal weepe, and be sad, but thou shalt be
merie and plenteous. 28 The gentiles shal enuie, and shal be able to
doe nothing against thee, sayth our Lord. 29 My handes shal couer thee,
that thy children see not hel. 30 Be pleasant thou mother with thy
children, because I wil deliuer thee sayth our Lord. 31 Remember thy
children that sleepe, for I wil bring them out of the sides of the
earth, & wil doe mercie with them: because I am merciful, sayth our
Lord omnipotent. 32 Embrace thy children til I come, & shew them
mercie: because my fountaines runne ouer, and my grace shal not faile.
33 I Esdras receiued commandment of our Lord, in mount Oreb; that I
should goe to Israel: to whom when I came, they refused me, and
reiected the commandement of our Lord. 34 And therfore, I say vnto you
gentiles, which heare, and vnderstand, Looke for your pastor, he wil
geue you the rest of eternitie: because he is at hand, that shal come
in the end of the world. 35 Be ye readie for the rewardes of the
kingdom, because perpetual light shal shine to you for time
euerlasting. 36 Flee from the shadow of this world: receiue ye the
pleasantnes of your glorie. I openly cal to witnes my sauiour. 37
Receiue the commended gift and be pleasant, geuing thankes to him that
called you to the heauenlie kingdomes. 38 Arise, & stand & see the
number of them that are signed in the feast of our Lord. 39 They that
haue transferred them selues from the shadow of the world, haue
receiued glorious garmentes of our Lord. 40 Receiue o Sion thy number,
and shut vp thyne made white, which haue accomplished the law of our
Lord. 41 The number of thy children, which thou didst wish is ful.
Desire the powre of our Lord that thy people may be sanctified, which
was called from the beginning. 42 I Esdras saw in mount Sion a great
multiude, which I could not number, and they did al prayse our Lord
with songes. (Apoc 7:9) 43 And in the middes of them was a young man
high of stature, appearing aboue ouer them al, & he put crownes vpon
euerie one of their heades, and he was more exalted. And I was astonied
at the miracle. 44 Then asked I an Angel, and sayd: Who are these Lord?
45 Who answering sayd to me: These are they that haue laid of the
mortal garment, and taken an immortal, and haue confessed the name of
God. Now they are crowned, and receiue palmes. 46 And I sayd to the
Angel: That yongman what is he, which putteth the crownes vpon them,
and geueth palmes into their handes? 47 And answering he sayd to me:
The same is the Sonne of God, whom they did confesse in the world: & I
begane to magnifie them, that stood strongly for the name of our Lord.
48 Then sayd the Angel to me: Goe, tel my people, what maner of
meruelous thinges and how great, thou hast sene of the Lord God.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 3

The workes of God are wonderful from the beginning, 7. and men
vngrateful 13. In Abraham God chose to himself a peculiar people: who
neuertheles were froward, and obstinate. 23. He also chose Dauid, but
stil the people were sinful: 28. the Babylonians also, by whom the are
afflicted, are no lesse but rather greater sinners.

IN the thirteth yeare of the ruine of the citie I was in Babylon, and
was trubled lying in my chamber, and my cogitations came vp ouer my
hart: 2 because I saw the desolation of Sion, and the abundance of them
that dwelt in Babylon. 3 And my spirit was tossed excedingly, and I
began to speake to the highest timorous wordes, 4 and sayd: O Lord
dominatour thou spakest from the beginning, when thou didst plant the
earth, and that alone, and didst rule ouer the people, (Gen 1) 5 and
gauest Adam a dead bodie: but that also was the worke of thy handes, &
didst breath into him the spirit of life, and he was made to liue
before thee: (Gen 2:7) 6 and thou broughst him into paradise, which thy
right hand had planted, before the earth came. 7 And him thou didst
command to loue thy way, and he transgressed it, & forth with thou
didst institute death in him, and in his posteritie, and there were
borne nations, and tribes, and peoples, and kindreds, wherof there is
no number. 8 And euerie nation walked in their owne wil, & they did
meruelous thinges before thee, and despised thy preceptes. 9 And agane
in time thou broughst in the floud vpon inhabitantes of the world, and
didst destroy them. (Gen 7) 10 And there was made in euery one of them,
as vnto Adam to dye, so to them the floud, 11 But thou didst leaue one
of them, Noe with his house and of him were al the iust. 12 And it came
to passe, when they began to be multiplied, that dwelt vpon the earth,
& multiplied children and peoples and manie nations: and they begane
againe to doe impietie more then the former. 13 And it came to passe
when they did iniquitie before thee, thou didst choose thee a man of
them whose name was Abraham. 14 And thou didst loue him and to him
onlie thou didst shew thy wil. (Gen 12) 15 And thou didst dispose vnto
him an euerlasting testament, and toldst him that thou wouldst neuer
forsake his seede. And thou gauest him Issac, and to Isaac thou gauest
Iacob and Esau. 16 And Iacob thou didst seuer to thy selfe, but Esau
thou didst separate. And Iacob grewe to a great multitude. 17 And it
came to passe when thou didst bring forth his sede out of AEgypt, thou
broughst it vpon mount Sinai. (Ex 19) 18 And thou didst bowe the
heauens, and fasten the earth, and didst shake the world, and madest
the depthes to tremble, and trubledst the world, 19 and thy glorie
passed foure gates of fire, and of earthquake, and winde, and frost,
that thou mightst geue a law to the seede of Iacob, and to the
generation of Israel diligence. 20 And thou didst not take away from
them a malignant hart, that thy law might bring forth fruite in them.
21 For Adam the first bearing a vicious hart transgressed and was
ouercome, yea and al that were borne of him. 22 And it was made a
permanent infirmitie, and the law with the hart of the people, with the
wickednes of the roote, and that which is good departed, and the wicked
remayned. 23 And the times passed, & the yeares were ended: and thou
didst raise vp vnto thee a seruant named Dauid, 24 and spakest vnto him
to build a citie of thy name, and to offer vnto thee in it
frankencense, and oblations. 25 And this was done manie yeares, and
they that inhabited the citie forsooke thee, 26 in al things as Adam
and al his generations. For they also vsed a wicked hart. 27 And thou
didst deliuer thy citie into the hands of thyne enimies. 28 Why, doe
they better thinges, that inhabite Babylon? And for this shal she rule
ouer Sion? (Jer 12) 29 It came to passe when I was come hither, and had
sene the impieties that can not be numbred: and my soul saw manie
offending this thirteth yeare, & my hart was astonied: 30 because I saw
how thou bearest with their sinne, and didst spare them that did
impiously, and didst destroy thine owne people, and preserue thine
enimies, and didst not signifie it. 31 I nothing remember how this way
should be forsaken: doth Babylon better thinges then Sion? 32 Or hath
anie nation knowen thee beside Israel: or what tribes haue beleued thy
testamentes as Iacob? 33 Whose reward hath not appeared, nor their
labour fructified. For passing through I passed among the nations, and
I saw them abound, and not mindeful of thy commandmentes. 34 Now
therfore wey our iniquities in a ballance, and theirs that dwel in the
world: & thy name shal not be found, but in Israel. 35 Or when haue not
they sinned in thy sight, that inhabite the earth? or what nation hath
so obserued thy commandmentes? 36 These certes by their names thou
shalt finde to haue kept thy commandments, but the nations thou shalt
not finde.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 4

Mans witte and reason is not able to vnderstand the counsel and
iudgement of God, 22. why his people are afflicted by wicked nations,
33. nor of times, and thinges to come.

AND the Angel answered me, that was sent to me, whose name was Vriel, 2
and sayd to me: Thy hart exceding hath exceded in this world, & thou
thinkest to comprehend the way of the Highest. 3 And I sayd: It is so
my Lord. And he answered me, & sayd: I am sent to shew thee three
wayes, & to propose to thee three similitudes. 4 Of the which if thou
shalt declare to me one of them, I also wil shew thee the way which
thou desirest to see, and wil teach thee whence a wicked hart is. 5 And
I sayd, Speak my Lord. And he sayd to me: Goe, wey me the weight of the
fire, or measure me the blast of the winde, or cal me backe the day
that is past. 6 And I answered, and sayd: what man borne can doe it,
that thou askest me of these thinges? 7 And he sayd to me: If I should
aske thee, saying: How great habitations are there in the hart of the
sea, or how great vaines be there in the beginning of the depth, or how
great vaines be there aboue the firmament, and what are the issues of
paradise: 8 thou wouldest perhaps say to me: I haue not descended into
the depth, nor into hel as yet, neither haue I ascended at anie time
into heauen. 9 But now I haue not asked thee, sauing of the fire, and
the winde, and the day by the which thou hast passed, and from the
which thou canst not be separated: and thou hast not answered me of
them. 10 And he sayd to me: Thou canst not know the thinges that are
thine which grow together with thee: 11 and how can thy vessel
comprehend the way of the Highest, and now the world being outwardly
corrupted, vnderstand the corruption euident in my sight: 12 I sayd to
him: Better were it for vs not to be, then yet liuing to liue in
impieties, and to suffer, and not to vnderstand for what thing. 13 And
he answered me, & said: Going forth I went forward to a wood of trees
in the filde, and they deuised a deuise, (Judges 9 / 2 Par 25) 14 and
said: Come and let vs goe, and make warre against the sea, that it may
retyre backe before vs, and we may make vs other woodes. 15 And in like
maner the waues of the sea they also deuised a deuise, and sayd: Come
let vs goe vp, let vs ouerthrow the woodes of the filde, that there
also we may consummate an other countrie for our selues. 16 And the
woodes deuise was made vaine, for fire came, and consumed it. 17
Likewise also the deuise of the waues of the sea. For the sand stood, &
stayed them. 18 For if thou wert iudge of these, whom wouldest thou
begin to iustifie, or whom to condemne? 19 And I answered, and sayd:
Verely they deuised a vayne deuise. For the earth is geuen to the wood,
and a place to the sea to carie her waues. 20 And he answered me, and
sayed: Thou hast iudged wel, and why hast thou not iudged for thy self?
21 For as the earth is geuen to the wood, and the sea for the waues
therof: so they that inhabite vpon the earth, can vnderstand onlie the
thinges that are vpon the earth: and they vpon the heauens, the thinges
that are aboue the height of the heauens. 22 And I answered, and sayd:
I besech thee Lord, that sense may be geuen me to vnderstand. 23 For I
meant not to aske of thy superiour thinges, but of those that passe by
vs dayly. For what cause Israel is geuen into reproche to the gentiles,
the people whom thou hast loued, is geuen to impious tribes, & the law
of our fathers is brought to destruction, & the written ordinances are
no where: 24 and we haue passed out of the world, as locustes, and our
life is astonishment and dreade, and we are not worthie to obtaine
mercie. 25 But what wil he doe to his name that is inuocated vpon vs?
and of these thinges I did aske. 26 And he answered me, and sayd: If
thou search very much, thou shalt often meruail: because the world
hastening hasteneth to passe, 27 and can not comprehend the thinges
which in times to come are promised to the iust: because this world is
ful of iniustice and infirmities. 28 But conerning the thinges that
thou demandest I wil tel thee: for the euil is sowed, and the
destruction therof is not yet come. 29 If then that which is sowen be
not turned vp, and the place depart where the euil is sowen, that shal
not come where the good is sowen. 30 Because the grayne of il seede
hath bene sowen in the hart of Adam from the beginning: and how much
impietie hath it ingendered vntil now, and doth ingender vntil the
floore come? 31 And esteme with thy self the graine of the il seede,
how much fruite of impietie it hath ingendred: 32 When the eares shal
be cut, which are innumerable, what a great floore wil they begin to
make? 33 And I answered, and sayd: How, and when shal these things be?
why are our yeares few and euil? 34 And he answered me, and sayd to me,
Hasten not aboue the Highest. For thou doest hasten in vaine to be
aboue him, for thy excesse is much. 35 Did not the soules of the iust
in the cellars, aske of these things, saying: How hope I so, and when
shal the fruite come of the floore of our reward? 36 And Ieremiel the
Archangel answered to those things, and sayd: When the number of the
sedes in you shal be filled, because he hath weyed the world in a
balance, 37 and with a measure hath he measured the times, and in
number he hath numbered the times, and hath not moued, nor stirred
them, vntil the foresayd measure be filled. 38 And I answered, and
sayd: O Lord Dominatour, we also are al ful of impietie. 39 And left
perhaps for vs the floores of the iust be not filled, for the sinnes of
the inhabitantes vpon the earth. 40 And he answered me, and sayd: Goe,
and aske a woman with childe, if when she hath accomplished her nine
monethes, her wombe can yet hold the infant within it? 41 And I sayd it
can not Lord. And he sayd to me, in hel the cellars of the soules are
like to the matrice. 42 For as she that is: In trauail maketh hast, to
escape the necessitie of trauailing: so this also hasteneth to render
those thinges which are commended to it. 43 From the beginning it shal
be shewed thee touching those thinges, which thou doest couet to see.
44 And I answered, and sayd: If I haue found grace before thine eyes, &
if it be possible, and if I by fitte, 45 shew mee if there be more to
come then is passed, or more things haue passed, then are to come. 46
What passed, I know: but what is to come, I know not. 47 And he sayd to
me: Stand vpon the right side, and I wil shew thee the interpretation
of the similitude. 48 And I stood, and saw: and behold a burning
fornace passed before me, & it came to passe when the flame passed, I
saw: and behold the smoke ouercame. 49 And these thinges there passed
before me a clowd ful of water, and with violence casting in much
raine: and when the violence of raine was cast, the droppes therin
ouercame. 50 And he sayd to me: Thinke with thyself, as the raine
increaseth more then the droppes, and the fire then the smoke: so did
the measure that passed, more a bound. But the droppes, and the smoke
ouercame: 51 and I prayed, & sayd, shal I liue thinkest thou vntil
these dayes? or what shal be in those dayes? 52 He answered me, and
sayd: Of the signes wherof thou askest me, in part I can tel thee,
howbeit of thy life I was not sent to tel thee, neither doe I know.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 5

Diuers signes of thinges to come are shewed to Esdras by an Angel: 16.
for the comforth of the people in captiuitie.

BVT concerning signes: behold the dayes shal come, wherin they that
inhabite the earth shal be taken in a great number: and the way of
truth shal be hid: and the countrie shal be barren from fayth. 2 And
iniustice shal be multiplied aboue that which thy self seest, & aboue
that which thou hast heard in time past. (Matt 24) 3 And they shal put
their foote into the countrie which now thou seest to reigne, and they
shal see it desolate. 4 And if the Highest geue thee life, thou shalt
see after the third trumpet, and the sunne shal sodenly shine agayne in
the night, and the moone thrise in a day, 5 and out of wood bloud shal
distil, and the stone shal geue his voice, and the peoples shal be
moued: 6 and he reigne, whom they hope not that inhabite vpon the
earth, and soules shal make their flight away. 7 & the sea of Sodom
shal cast the fishes, and shal make a noise in the night, which manie
knew not, and al shal heare the voice therof, 8 and there shal be made
a confusion in manie places, and the fire shal often be sent backe, and
the sauage beastes shal goe to other places, and wemen in their
monethlie flowers shal bring forth monsters, 9 and in swete waters shal
salt waters be found, and al frendes shal ouerthrow one an other: and
then shal witte be hid, and vnderstanding shal be separated into his
cellar: 10 and it shal be sought of manie, and shal not be found: and
iniustice shal be multiplied, and incontinencie vpon the earth. 11 And
one countrie shal aske her neighbour, and shal say: Hath iustice doing
iust passed throught thee? and she shal denie it. 12 And it shal be in
that time, men shal hope, and shal not obtaine: they shal labour, and
their wayes shal not haue successe. 13 These signes I am permitted to
tel thee: and if thou pray againe and weepe, as also now, and fast
seuen dayes, thou shalt heare againe greater thinges then these. 14 And
I awaked, and my bodie did shiuer excedingly: and my soule laboured,
that it fainted: 15 and the Angel that came, that spake in me, held me,
and strengthened me, and sette me vpon my feete. 16 And it came to
passe in the second night, and Salathiel the prince of the people came
to me, and sayd to me: Where wast thou? and why is thy countenance
heauie? 17 Knowest thou not that Isreal is committed to thee in the
countrie of their transmigration? 18 Rise vp therfore, and taste bread,
and forsake vs not, as the pastour his flocke in the hand of wicked
wolues. 19 And I sayd to him: Goe from me, & approch not vnto me. And
he heard, as I sayd: and he departed from me. 20 And I fasted seuen
dayes howling & weeping, as Vriel the Angel commanded me. 21 And it
came to passe after seuen dayes, and againe cogitations of my hart
molested me very much, 22 and my soule resumed the spirit of
vnderstanding: & agayne I began to speake wordes before the Highest: 23
and I sayd: Lord Dominatour of euerie wood of the earth, & al the trees
therof, thou hast chosen one vineyard: 24 & of euerie land of the world
thou hast chosen thee one ditch: & of al the flowers of the world thou
hast chosen thee one lilie: 25 and of al depthes of the sea, thou hast
filled thee one riuer: and of al the builded cities, thou hast
sanctified vnto thyself Sion: 26 and of al created soules, thou hast
named thee one doue: and of al beastes that were made, thou hast
prouided thee one shepe: 27 and of al multiplied peoples, thou host
purchased thee one people: and a law approued of al thou hast geuen to
this people, whom thou didst desire. 28 And now Lord, why hast thou
deliuered one vnto manie? And thou hast perpared vpon one roote others,
and hast dispersed thy onlie one in manie: 29 and they haue troden vpon
it, which gainesayd thy couenants, and which beleued not thy
testamentes. 30 And if hating thou hatest thy people, it ought to be
chastised with thy handes. 31 And it came to passe, when I had spoken
the wordes, and the Angel was sent to me, that came to me before the
night past, 32 and he sayd to me: Heare me, and I wil instruct thee:
and harken to me, and I wil adde before thee. 33 And I sayd: Speake my
Lord. And he sayd to me: Thou art become excedingly in excesse of minde
for Israel: hast thou loued it more then him that made it? 34 And I
sayd to him: No Lord, but for sorow I haue spoken, for my veynes
torment me euerie houre, to apprehend the pathe of the Highest, and to
search part of his iudgement. 35 And he sayd to me: Thou canst not. And
I sayd: Why Lord? To what was I borne, or why was not my mothers wombe
my graue, that I might not see the labour of Iacob, & the wearines of
the stocke of Israel? 36 And he sayd to me: Number me the thinges that
are not yet come, and gather me the dispersed droppes, and make me the
withered flowers grene againe, 37 and open me the shut cellars, & bring
me forth the blastes inclosed in them, shew me the image of a voice:
and then wil I shew thee the labour that thou desirest to see. 38 And I
sayd: Lord Dominatour, for who is there that can know these thinges,
but he that hath not his habitation with men? 39 And I am vnwise, and
how can I speake of these thinges, which thou hast asked me? 40 And he
sayd to me: As thou canst not doe one of these thiges, which haue bene
sayd: so canst thou not finde my iudgement, or in the end the charitie,
which I haue promised to the people. 41 And I sayd: But behold Lord
thou art nigh to them that are nere the end: and what shal they doe
that haue bene before me, or we, or they after vs? 42 And he sayd to
me: I wil resemble my iudgement to a crowne. As there shal not be
slacknes of the last, so neither swiftnes of the former. 43 And I
answered, and sayd: Couldst thou not make them that haue bene, and that
are, and that shal be, at once, that thou mayst shew thy iudgement the
quicker? 44 And he answered me, and sayd: The creature can not hasten
aboue the Creatour, nor the world sustayne them that are to be created
in it, at once. 45 And I sayd: As thou didst say to thy seruant, that
quickening thou didst quicken the creature created by thee at once, and
the creature susteined it: it may now also beare them present at once.
46 And he sayd to me: Aske the matrice of a woman, & thou shalt say to
it: And if thou bring forth children, why by times? Aske it therfore,
that it geue ten at once. 47 And I sayd, it can not verily: but
according to time. 48 And he sayd to me: And I haue geuen a matrice to
the earth for them, that are sowen vpon it by time. 49 For as the
infant bringeth not forth the thinges that perteyne to the aged, so
haue I disposed the world created of me. 50 And I asked, and sayd:
Wheras thou hast now geuen me a way, I wil speake before thee: for our
mother, of whom thou toldest me, yet she is yong: now draweth nigh to
old age. 51 And he answered me, and sayd: Aske her that beareth
children, and she wil tel thee. 52 For thou shalt say to her: Why are
not they whom thou hast brought forth, now like to them that were
before thee, but lesse of stature? 53 And she also wil say vnto thee:
They that are borne in the youth of streingth are of one sort, and they
of an other, that are borne about the time of old age, when the matrice
fayleth. 54 Consider therfore thou also, that you are of lesse stature,
then they that were before you: 55 and they that are after you, of
lesser then you, as it were creatures now waxing old, and past the
strength of youth. 56 And I sayd: I besech thee Lord, if I haue found
grace before thine eyes, shew vnto thy seruant, by whom thou doest
visite thy creature.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 6

God knowing al thinges before they were made, created them 54. for man:
and considerth the endes of al.

AND he sayd to me: In the beginning of the earthlie world, and before
the endes of the world stood, and before the congregation of the windes
did blow, (Prov 8) 2 and before the voyces of thunders sounded, &
before the flashinges of lightenings shined, and before the fundations
of paradise were confirmed, 3 and before beautiful flowers were sene,
and before the moued powers were established, and before the
innumerable hostes of Angels were gathered, 4 and before the heightes
of the ayre were aduanced, and before the measures of the firmaments
were named, and before the chymneies were hote in Sion, 5 and before
the present yeares were searched out, and before their inuentions that
now sinne, were put away, and they signed that made fayth their
treasure: 6 then I thought, and they were made by me only, and not by
any other: and the end by me, and not by any other. 7 And I answered,
and sayd: What separation of times shal there be? and when shal the end
of the former be, and the begynning of that which foloweth? 8 And he
sayd to me, from Abraham vnto Isaac, when Iacob and Esau were borne of
him, the hand of Iacob held from the begynning the heele of Esau, 9 for
the end of this world is Esau, and the begynning of the next Iacob. 10
The hand of a man betwen the heele and the hand. Aske no other thing
Esdras. 11 And I answered, and sayd: O Lord dominatour, if I haue found
grace before thyne eyes, 12 I pray thee shew thy seruant the end of thy
signes, wherof thou didst shew me part the night before. 13 And he
answered, and sayd to me: Arise vpon thy feete, and heare a voice most
ful of sound. 14 And it shal be as it were a commotion, neither shal
the place be moued wherin thou standest. 15 Therfore when it speaketh
be not thou afrayd, because of the end is the word, and the fundation
of the earth vnderstood, 16 for concerning them the word trembleth and
is moued, for it knoweth that their end must be changed. 17 And it came
to passe, when I had heard, I rose vpon my feete, and I heard: and
behold a voice speaking, and the sound therof as the sound of manie
waters: 18 and it sayd: Behold the dayes come, and the time shal be
when I wil begyne to approch, that I may visite the inhabitantes vpon
the earth. 19 And when I wil begin to enquire of them that vniustly
haue hurt with their iniustice, and when the humilitie of Sion shal be
accomplished. 20 And when the world shal be ouersigned that shal
beginne to passe, I wil doe these signes: Bookes shal be opened before
the face of the firmament, and al shal see together, 21 and infantes of
one yeare shal speake with their voices, & wemen with child shal bring
forth vntimely infantes not ripe of three or foure monethes, and shal
liue, and shal be raysed vp. 22 And sodenly shal appeare sowen places
not sowen, & ful cellers shal sodenly be found emptie: 23 and a trumpet
shal sound; which when al shal heare, they wil sodenly be afrayd. 24
And it shal be in that time, freindes as enimies shal ouerthrow
freindes, and the earth shal be afrayd with them: & the vaynes of
fountaynes shal stand, and shal not runne in three howres: 25 and it
shal be, euerie one that shal be leaft of al these, of whom I haue
foretold thee, he shal be saued, and shal see my saluation, & the end
of your world. 26 And the men that are receiued, shal see, they that
tasted not death from their natiuitie, and the hart of the inhabitantes
shal be turned into an other sense. 27 For euil shal be put out, and
deceite shal be extinguished, 28 but fayth shal florish, and corruption
shal be ouercome, and truth shal be shewed, which was without fruite so
manie dayes. 29 And it came to passe, when he spake to me, & I loe by
litle & litle looked on him before whom I stood, 30 and he sayd to me
these wordes: I am come to shew thee the time of the night to come. 31
If therfore thou pray agayne, and fast agayne seuen dayes, agayne I wil
tel thee greater thinges by the day which I haue heard. 32 For thy
voice is heard before the Highest. For the strong hath sene thy
direction, and hath fore sene the chastitie which thou hast had from
thy youth: 33 and for this cause he hath sent me to shew thee al these
thinges, and to say to thee, haue confidence, and feare not, 34 and
hasten not with the former times to thinke vayne thinges, that thou
hasten not from the last times. 35 And it came to passe after these
thinges, and I wept againe, and in like maner I fasted seuen dayes, to
accomplish the three weekes, that were told me. 36 And it came to passe
in the eight night, and my hart was trubled againe in me, and I began
to speake before the Highest. 37 For my spirit was inflamed excedingly,
and my soul was distressed. 38 And I sayd: O Lord, speaking thou didst
speake from the beginning of creature from the first day, saying: Let
heauen be made and earth: and thy word was a perfect worke. 39 And then
there was spirit, and darknesse was caried about, and silence, the
sound of the voyce of man was not yet from thee. 40 Then thou didst
command the lighsome light to be brought forth of thy treasures, wherby
thy worke might appeare. 41 And in the second day thou didst create the
spirit of the firmament, and commandest it to diuide, and to make a
diuision betwen the waters, that a certayn part should depart vpward,
and part should remaine beneth. 42 And in the third day thou didst
command the waters to be gathered together in the seuenth part of the
earth: but sixe partes thou didst drie and preserue, that of them might
be seruing before thee thinges sowen of God, and tilled. 43 For thy
word proceded, and the worke forth with was made. 44 For sodenly came
forth fruite of multitude infinite, and diurse tastes of concupiscence,
and flowers of vnchangeable colour, and odours of vnsearcheable smel,
and in the third day these thinges were made. 45 And in the fourth day
thou didst command to be made the brightnesse of the sunne, the light
of the moone, the disposition of the starres: 46 and didst command them
that they should serue man, that should be made. 47 And in the fifth
day: thou saydst to the seuenth part, where the water was gathered
together, that it should bring forth beastes, and foules, and fishes:
and so was it done, 48 the dumme water and without life, the thinges
that by Gods appointement were commanded, made beastes, that therby the
nations may declare thy meruelous workes. 49 And then thou didst
preserue two soules: the name of one thou didst cal Henoch, and the
name of the second thou didst cal Leuiathan, 50 and thou didst separate
them from eche other. For the seuenth part, where the water was
gathered together, could not hold them. 51 And thou gauest to Henoch
one part, which was dried the third day, to dwelt therin, where are a
thousand mountaynes. 52 But to Leuiathan thou gauest the seuenth part
being moyst, and kepst it, that it might be to deuoure whom thou wilt,
and when thou wilt. 53 And in the sixt day thou didst command the
earth, to create before thee cattel, and beastes, and creeping
creatures: 54 and ouer these Adam, whom thou madest ruler ouer al the
workes, which thou didst make, & out of him are al we brought forth,
and the people whom thou hast chosen. 55 And al these thinges I haue
sayd before thee o Lord, because thou didst create the world for vs. 56
But the residue of the nations borne of Adam thou saydst that they were
nothing, and that they were like to spittle, and as it were the droping
out of a vessel thou didst liken the abundance of them. 57 And now
Lord, behold these nations which are reputed for nothing, haue begune
to rule ouer vs, and to deuoure vs: 58 but we thy people whom thou
didst cal thy first onlie begotten emulatour, are deliuered into their
handes: 59 and if the world was created for vs, why doe not we possesse
inheritance with the world? how long these thinges?

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 7

Without tribulations no man can attayne immortal life: 17. which the
iust shal inherite: and the wicked shal perish. 28. Christ wil come,
and dye for mankind. 36. Prayers of the iust shal profite til the end
of this world, but not after the general iudgement. 48. Al sinned in
Adam. 52. and haue added more sinnes, 57. but it is in mans powre, 62.
by Gods grace, to liue eternally.

AND it came to passe when I had ended to speake these wordes, the Angel
was sent to me, which had bene sent to me the first nights, 2 and he
sayd to me: Arise Esdras, and heare the wordes which I am come to
speake to thee. 3 And I sayd: Speake my God. And he sayd to me: The sea
is set in a large place, that it might be deepe and wide: 4 but the
entrance to it shal be set in a straict place, that it might be like to
riuers. 5 For who witting wil enter into the sea, and see it, or rule
ouer it: if he passe not the streite, how shal he come into the bredth?
6 Also an other thing: A citie is built, and set in a plaine place, and
it is ful of al goodes. 7 The entrance therof narrow, and set in a
stepe place, so that on the right hand there was fire, & on the left
depe water: 8 and there is one onlie pathe set betwen them, that is,
betwen the fire and the water, so that the pathe can not conteyne, but
onlie a mans steppe. 9 And if the citie shal be geuen a man for
inheritance, if he neuer passe through the peril set before it, how
shal he receiue his inhertance? 10 And I sayd: So Lord. And he sayd to
me, So it is: Israel also a part. 11 For I made the world for them: and
when Adam transgressed my constitution, that was iudged which was done.
12 And the entrance of this world were made streite, and sorowful, &
paynful, and few and euil, and ful of dangers, & stuffed very much with
labour. 13 For the entrances of the greater world are large andsecure,
and making fruite of immortalitie. 14 If then they that liue entring in
enter into these streite and vayne thinges: they can not receiue the
thinges that are layd vp. 15 Now therfore why art thou trubled, wheras
thou art corruptible? and why art thou moued, wheras thou art mortal?
16 And why hast thou not taken in thy hart that which is to come, but
that which is present? 17 I answered, and sayd: Lord dominatour: behold
thou hast disposed by thy law that the iust shal inherite these
thinges, and the impious shal perish. (Deut 8) 18 But the iust shal
suffer the streites, hoping for the wyde places, for they that haue
done impiously, haue both suffered the streites, and shal not see the
wide places. 19 And he sayd to me: There is no iudge aboue God, nor
that vnderstandeth aboue the Highest. 20 For manie present doe perish,
because the law of God which was set before, is neglected. 21 For God
commanding commanded them that came, when they came, what doing they
should liue, and what obseruing they should not be punished. 22 But
they were not perswaded, and gaynesayd him, and made to them selues a
cogitation of vanitie, 23 and proposed to them selues deceites of
sinnes, & they sayd to the Highest that he was not, and they knew not
his wayes, 24 and dispised his law, and denyed his couenaunces, and had
not fidelitie in his ordinances, and did not accomplish his workes. 25
For this cause Esdras, the emptie to the emptie, and the ful to the
ful. 26 Behold the time shal come, and it shal be when the signes shal
come, which I haue foretold thee, and the bride shal appeare, and
appearing she shal be shewed that now is hid with the earth: 27 and
euerie one that is deliuered from the foresaid euils, he shal see my
meruelous thinges. 28 For my sonne IESVS shal be reueled with them that
are with him, and they shal be merie that are leaft in the foure
hundred yeares. 29 And it shal be after these yeares, and my sonne
CHRIST shal dye: and al men that haue breath, 30 and the world shal be
turned into the old silence seuen dayes, as in the former iudgementes,
so that none shal be leaft. 31 And it shal be after seuen dayes, and
the world shal be raysed vp that yet waketh not, and shal dye
corrupted: 32 and the earth shal render the thinges that sleepe in it,
& the dust them that dwel in it with silence, and the cellars shal
render the soules that are commended to them. 33 And the Highest shal
be reueled vpon the seate of iudgement, and miseries shal passe, and
long sufferance shal be gathered together. 34 And iudgement onlie shal
remayne, truth shal stand, and fayth shal waxe strong, 35 and the worke
shal folow, and the reward shal be shewed, and iustice shal awake, and
iniustice shal not haue dominion. [See note below.] 36 And I sayd:
First Abraham prayed for the Sodomites, and Moyses for the fathers that
sinned in the desert. (Gen 18 / Ex 32) 37 And they that were after him
for Isreal in the dayes of Achaz, and of Samuel, 38 and Dauid for the
destruction, and Salomon for them that came vnto the sanctification. (2
Kings 24:17 / 2 Par 6:13) 39 And Elias for them that receiued raine,
and for the dead that he might liue, (3 Kings 17 & 18) 40 and Ezechias
for the people in the dayes of Sennacherib, and manie for manie. (4
Kings 19:15) 41 If therfore now when corruptible did increase, and
iniustice was multiplied, and the iust prayed for the impious: why now
also shal it not be so? 42 And he answered me and sayd: This present
world is not the end, much glorie remaineth in it: for this cause they
prayed for the impotent. 43 For the day of iudgement shal be the end of
this time, and the beginning of the immortalitie to come, wherein
corruption is past: 44 intemperance is dissolued, incredulitie is cut
of: and iustice hath increased, truth is strong. 45 For then no man can
saue him that hath perished, nor drowne him that hath ouercome. And I
answered, 46 and sayd: This is my word the first and the last, that it
had bene better not to geue the earth to Adam, or when he had now geuen
it, to restraine him that he should not sinne. 47 For what doth it
profit men presently to liue in sorow, and being dead to hope for
punishment? 48 O what hast thou done Adam? For if thou didst sinne, it
was not made thy fal only, but ours also which came of thee. (Rom 5:12)
49 For what doth it profit vs if immortal time be promised to vs: but
we haue done mortal workes? 50 And that euerlasting hope is foretold
vs: but we most wicked are become vayne? 51 And that habitations of
health and securitie are reserued for vs, but we haue conuerst
naughtely? 52 And that the glorie of the Highest is reserued to protect
them that haue slowly conuerst: but we haue walked in most wicked
wayes. 53 And that paradise shal be shewed, whose fruite continueth
incorrupted, wherin is securitie and remedie: 54 but we shal not enter
in: for we haue conuerst in vnlawful places. 55 And their faces which
haue had abstinence, shal shyne aboue the starres: but our faces blacke
aboue darkenes. 56 For we did not thinke liuing when we did iniquitie,
that we shal beginne after death to suffer. 57 And he answered, and
sayd: This is the cogitation of the battel which man shal fight, who is
borne vpon the earth, 58 that if he shal be ouercome, he suffer that
which thou hast sayd: but if he ouercome he shal receiue that which I
say: 59 for this is the life which Moyses spake of when he liued, to
the people, saying: Choose vnto thee life, that thou mayst liue. (Deut
30:19) 60 But they beleued him not, no nor the Prophetes after him, no
nor me which haue spoken to them. 61 Because there should not be sorow
vnto their perdition, as there shal be ioy vpon them, to whom saluation
is perswaded. 62 And I answered, and sayd: I know Lord, that the
Highest is called merciful in that, that he hath mercie on them which
are not yet come into the world, 63 and that he hath mercie on them
which conuerse in his law: 64 and he is long suffering, because he
sheweth long sufferance to them that haue sinned, as it were with their
owne workes: 65 and he is bountiful, because he wil geue according to
exigentes: 66 and of freat mercie, because he multiplieth more mercies
to them that are present, and that are past, and that are to come. 67
For if he shal not multiplie his mercies, the world shal not be made
aliue with them that did inherite it. 68 And he geueth: for if he shal
not geue of his bountie, that they may be releeued which haue done
iniquitie, the tenth thousand part of men can not be quickned from
their iniquities. 69 And the iudge if he shal not forgeue them that are
cured with his word, and wype away a multitude of contentions: there
should not perhaps be leaft in an innumerable multitiude, but very few.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 8

God is merciful in this world, yet fewe are saued. 6. Gods workes, and
disposition of his creatures are meruelous. 15. Esdras prayeth for the
people of Israel: 37. and saluation is promised to the iust, and
punishment threatned to the wicked.

AND he answered me, & sayd: This world the Highest made for manie, but
that to come for few. 2 And I wil speake a similitude Esdras before
thee. For as thou shalt aske the earth, and it wil tel thee, that it
wil geue much more earth wherof earthen worke may be made, but a litle
dust wherof gold is made: so also is the act of this present world. 3
Manie in deede are created, but few shal be saued. (Matt 20:16) 4 And I
answered, and sayd: Then o soul swallow vp the sense, and deuoure that
which is wise. 5 For thou art agred to obey, and willing to prophecie.
For there is no space geuen thee but only to liue. 6 O Lord if thou
wilt not permitte thy seruant, that we pray before thee, and thou geue
vs seede to the hart, and tillage to the vnderstanding, wherof may the
fruite be made, wherby euerie corrupt person may liue, that shal beare
the place of a man? 7 For thou art alone, and we are one workmanshippe
of thy handes, as thou hast spoken: 8 and as now the bodie made in the
matrice, and thou doest geue the members, thy creature is preserued in
fire & water: and nine monethes thy workemanship doth suffer thy
creature that is created in it: 9 and it self that keepeth, and that
which is kept, both shal be preserued: and the matrice being preserued
rendreth agayne at some time the thinges that are growen in it. 10 For
thou hast commanded of the members, that is the brestes to geue milke
vnto the fruite of the brestes, 11 that the thing which is made, may be
nourished til a certayne time, and afterward thou mayst dispose him to
thy mercie. 12 For thou hast, brought him vp in thy iustice, and hast
instructed him in thy law, and hast corrected him in thy vnderstanding:
13 and thou shalt mortifie him, as thy creature: and shalt geue him
life, as thy worke. 14 If then thou wilt destroy him that is made with
so great labours: it is easie by thy commandment to be ordayned, that
also which was made, might be preserued. 15 And now Lord I wil speake,
of euerie man thou rather knowest: but concerning thy people, for which
I am sorowful: 16 and concerning thine inheritance, for which I mourne,
and for Israel for whom I am pensiue, and concerning Iacob, for whom I
am sorowful. 17 Therfore wil I begin to pray before thee for me, & for
them: because I see our defaultes that inhabite the earth. 18 But I
haue heard of the celeritie of the iudge that shal be. 19 Therfore
heare my voyce, and vnderstand my word, and I wil speake before thee.
20 The beginning of the wordes of Esdras before he was assumpted: and I
sayd: Lord which inhabitest the world, whose eyes are eleuated vnto
thinges on high and in the ayre: 21 and whose throne is inestimable,
and glorie incomprehensible: by whom standeth an host of Angels with
trembling, 22 whose keping is turned in wynde and fire, thou whose word
is true, and sayings premanent: 23 whose commandment is strong, and
disposition terrible: whose looke dryeth vp the depthes, and
indignation maketh the mountaynes to melt, and truth doth testifie. 24
Heare the prayer of thy seruant, & with thine eares receiue the
petition of thy creature. 25 For whiles I liue, I wil speake: and
whiles I vnderstand, I wil answere: 26 Neither doe thou respect the
sinnes of thy people, but them that serue thee in truth. 27 Neither doe
thou attend the impious endeuours of the nations, but them that with
sorowes haue kept thy testimonies. 28 Neither thinke thou of them that
in thy sight haue conuerst falsly, but remember them that according to
thy wil haue knowen thy feare. 29 Neither be thou willing to destroy
them that haue had the maners of beastes: but respect them that haue
taught thy law gloriously. 30 Neither haue indignation towards them,
which are iudged worse then beastes: but loue them that alwayes haue
confidence in thy iustice, and glorie. 31 Because we and our fatheres
languish with such diseases: but thou for sinners shalt be called
merciful. 32 For if thou shalt be desirous to haue mercie on vs, then
thou shalt be called merciful, to vs hauing no workes of iustice. 33
For the iust which haue manie workes layd vp, of their owne workes shal
receiue reward. 34 For what is man, that thou art angrie with him: or
the corruptible kinde, that thou art so bitter touching it? 35 For in
truth there is no man of them that be borne, which hath not done
impiously, and of them that confesse, which haue not sinned. (3 Kings
8:46 / 2 Par 6:36) 36 For in this shal thy iustice be declared, and thy
goodnes, o Lord, when thou shalt haue mercie on them, that haue no
substance of good workes. 37 And he answered me, and sayd: Thou hast
spoken somethinges rightly: and according to thy wordes, so also shal
it be done, 38 because I wil not in dede thinke vpon the worke of them
that haue sinned before death, before the iudgement, before perdition:
39 but I wil reioyce vpon the creature of the iust, and I wil remember
their pilgrimage also, and saluation, and receiuing of reward. 40
Therfore as I haue spoken, so also it is. 41 For as the husbandman
soweth vpon the ground manie seedes, and planteth manie plantes, but
not al which were sowen in time, are preserued, nor yet al that were
planted, shal take roote: so they also that are sowen in the world,
shal not al be saued. (Matt 13 & 20) 42 And I answered, and sayd: If I
haue found grace, let me speake. 43 As the seede of the husbandman, if
it come not vp, or receiue not the rayne in time, if it be corupted
with much rayne, perisheth: 44 so likewise also man who made with thy
handes, and thou named his image: because thou art likened to him, for
whom thou hast made al thinges, and hast likened him to the seede of
the husbandman. 45 Be not angrie vpon vs, but spare thy people, and
haue mercie on thy inheritance. And thou hast mercie on thy creature.
46 And he answered me, and sayd: The thinges that are present to them
that are present, and that shal be, to them that shal be. 47 For thou
lackest much to be able to loue my creature aboue me: and to thee often
times, euen to thyselfe I haue approched, but to the vniust neuer. 48
But in this also thou art meruelous before the Highest, 49 because thou
hast humbled thyself as becometh thee: & hast not iudged thyself, that
among the iust thou maist be very much glorified. 50 For which cause
manie miseries, and miserable thinges shal be done to them that
inhabite the world in the later dayes: because they haue walked in much
pride. 51 But thou for thyselfe vnderstand, & for them that are like
vnto thee seeke glorie. 52 For to you paradise is open, the tree of
life is planted, time to come is prepared, abundance is prepared, a
citie is builded, rest is approued, goodnes is perfited, & perfit
wisdome. 53 The roote of euil is signed from you: infirmitie, and mothe
is hid from you: & corruption is fled into hel in obliuion. 54 Sorowes
are past, & the treasure of immortalitie is shewed in the end. 55 Adde
not therfore inquiring of the multitude of them that perish. 56 For
they also receiuing libertie, haue despised the Highest, and contemned
his lawe, and forsaken his wayes. 57 Yea and moreouer they haue troden
downe his iust ones, 58 and haue sayd in their hart, that there is no
God: and that, knowing that they dye. (Ps 13 & 52) 59 For as the
thinges aforesayd shal receiue you: so thirst and torment, which are
prepared shal take them: for he would not man to be destroyed. 60 But
they them selues also which are created, haue defyled his name which
made them: & haue bene vnkind to him that prepared life. 61 Wherfore my
iudgement now approcheth. 62 Which thinges I haue not shewed to al, but
to thee, & to few like vnto thee. And I answered, and sayd: 63 Behold
now Lord thou hast shewed me a multitude of signes, which thou wilt
beginne to doe in the latter times: but thou hast not shewed me at what
time.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 9

Certaine signes shal goe before the day of iudgement. 14. More shal
perish then be saued. 25. Prayer with other good workes, are meanes to
saluation.

AND he answered me, and sayd: Measuring measure thou the time in it
selfe: and it shal be when thou seest, after a certaine part of the
signes which are spoken of before shal passe, 2 then shalt thou
vnderstand, that the same is the time wherin the Highest wil beginne to
visite the world that was made by him. 3 And when there shal be sene in
the world mouing of places, and truble of peoples, 4 then shalt thou
vnderstand, that of these spake the Highest, from the dayes that were
before thee, from the beginning. 5 For as al that is made in the world
hath a beginning, and also a consummation, and the consummation is
manifest: 6 so also the times of the Highest haue the beginning
manifest in wonders and powers, and the consummations in worke and in
signes. 7 And it shal be, euery one that shal be saued, and that can
escape by his workes, and by fayth, in which you haue beleeued, 8 shal
be leaft out of the foresayd dangers, and shal see my saluation in my
land, and in my costes, because I haue sancitifed my selfe from the
world. 9 And then shal they be in miserie, that now haue abused my
wayes: and they that haue reiected them in contempt, shal abide in
torments. 10 For they that knew not me, hauing obtained benefits when
they liued: 11 and they that loathed my law, when they yet had
libertie, 12 and when as yet place of penance was open to them
vnderstoode not, but despised: they must after death in torment know
it. 13 Thou therfore be not yet curious, how the impious shal be
tormented: but inquire how the iust shal be saued, and whose the world
is, and for whom the world is, and when. 14 And I answered, and sayd:
15 I haue spoken hertofore, and now I say, and hereafter wil say: that
they are more which perish then that shal be saued: (Matt 10) 16 as a
floud is multiplied aboue, more then a droppe. 17 And he ansvvered me,
and sayd: Like as the field so also the sedes: and as the flovvers,
such also the colours: and as the workeman, such also the worke: and
such as the husbandman, such is the husbandrie: because it was the time
of the world. 18 And now when I was preparing for them, for these that
now are before the world was made, wherin they should dwel: and no man
gaynsayd me. 19 For then euery man, and now the creator in this world
prepared, and haruest not fayling, and law vnsearchable their manners
are corrupted. 20 And I considered the world, and behold there was
danger because of the cogitations that came in it. 21 And I saw, and
spared it very much: and I kept vnto my selfe a grape kernel of a
cluster, and a plant of a great trybe. 22 Let the multitude therfore
perish, which was borne without cause, and let my kernel be kept, & my
plant: because I finished it with much labour. 23 And thou if thou adde
yet seuen other dayes, but thou shalt not fast in them, 24 thou shalt
goe into a field of flowers, where no house is built: & thou shalt eate
only of the flowers of the field, and flesh thou shalt not tast, and
wine thou shalt not drinke, but only flowers. 25 Pray to the Highest
without intermission, and I wil come, and wil speake with thee. 26 And
I went forth, as he sayd to me, into a field which is called Ardath,
and I sate there among the flowers. And I did eate of the herbes of the
field, and the meate of them made me ful. 27 And it came to passe after
seuen dayes, and I sate downe vpon the grasse, and my hart was trubled
ayayne as before. 28 And my mouth was opened, and I beganne to speake
before the Highest, and sayd: 29 O Lord thou shewing thy selfe to vs,
wast shewed to our fathers in the desert, which is not troden, and
vnfruitful, when they came out of AEgypt: and saying thou saydst: (Ex
19 & 24 / Deut 4) 30 Thou Israel heare me, and sede of Iacob attend to
my wordes. 31 For behold, I sow my lawe in you, and it shal bring forth
fruite in you, and you shal be glorified in it for euer. 32 For our
fathers receiuing the law obserued it not, and kept not my ordinances,
and the fruite of the law did not appeare: for it could not, because it
was thine. 33 For they that receiued it, perished, not keeping that
which had bene sowen in them. (Ex 32) 34 And behold it is the custome,
that when the earth hath receiued sede, or the sea a shippe, or some
vessel meate or drinke: when that shal be destroyed wherin it was
sowne, or into the which it was cast: 35 that which was sowne, or cast
in, or the thinges that were receiued, are destroyed withal, and the
thinges receiued now tarye not with vs: but it is not so done to vs. 36
We in dede that receiued the law, sinning haue perished, and our hart
that receiued it: 37 For the law hath not perished, but hath remayned
in his labour. (Ezech 48) 38 And when I spake these thinges in my hart,
I looked backe with myne eyes, and saw a woman on the right side, and
behold she mourned, and wept with a lowd voice, and was sorrowful in
mynde exceedingly, and her garments rent, and ashes vpon her heade. 39
And I left the cogitations, wherin I was thinking, and I turned to her
and sayd to her: 40 Why weepest thou? and why art thou sorie in mynde.
And she sayd to me: 41 Suffer me my Lord, that I may lament myselfe, &
adde sorrow: because I am of a very pensiue mynde, and am humbled
exceedingly. 42 And I sayd to her, What ayleth thee: tel me. And she
sayd to me: 43 I thy seruant haue beene barren, and haue not borne
childe, hauing a husband thirty yeares. 44 For I euery howre, and
euerie day, and these thirty yeares do beseche the Highest night and
day. 45 And it came to passe, after thirtie yeares God heard me thy
handmayd, and saw my humilitie, and attended to my tribulation, and
gaue me a sonne: and I was very ioyful vpon him, and my husband, and al
my citizens, and we did glorifie the Strong exceedingly. 46 And I
nourished him with much labour. 47 And it came to passe when he was
growen, and came to take a wife, I made a feast day.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 10

The state of Ierusalem is prefigured by a woman mourning, 25. and
afterwardes reioycing.

AND it came to passe, when my sonne was entred into his inner chamber,
he fel downe, and dyed: 2 and we al ouerthrewe the lights, and al my
citizens rose vp to comfort me, and I was quiet vntil the other day at
night. 3 And it came to passe, when al were quiet to comfort me, that I
might be quiet: and I arose in the night, and fled: and came as thou
seest into this field. 4 And I meane nowe not to returne into the
citie, but to stay here: and neither eate, nor drinke, but without
intermission to mourne, and to fast vntil I dye. 5 And I left the talke
wherin I was, and with anger answered her, & sayd: 6 Thou foole aboue
al wemen, seest thou not our mourning, & what thinges chance to vs? 7
Because Sion our mother is sorroweful with al sorrowe, and humbled, and
mourneth most bitterly. 8 And now wheras we al mourne, and are sadde:
wheras we are sorrowful, and art thou sorrowful for one sonne? 9 For
aske the earth, and it wil tel thee: that it is she, that ought to
lament the fal of so manie thinges that spring vpon it. 10 And of her
were al borne from the beginning, and others shal come: and behold,
almost al walke into perdition, and the multitude of them commeth to
destruction. 11 And who then ought to mourne more, but she that hath
lost so great a multitude, rather then thou which art sorie for one? 12
And if thou say vnto me, that my mourning is not lyke the earthes:
because I haue lost the fruite of my wombe, which I bare with sorrowes,
and brought forth with paynes: 13 but the earth according to the maner
of the earth, and the present multitude in it hath departed as it came:
and I saye to thee, 14 as thou hast brought forth with payne, so the
earth also geueth her fruite for man from the beginning to him that
made her. 15 Now therfore kepe in with thy sorrowe, and beare stoutly
the chances that haue befallen thee. 16 For if thou iustifie the end of
God, thou shalt in time both receiue his counsel, and also in such
thinges thou shalt be praysed. 17 Goe in therfore into the citie to thy
husband. And she sayd to me: 18 I wil not doe it, neither wil I enter
into the citie, but here wil I dye. 19 And I added yet to speake to
her, & sayd: 20 Doe not this word, but consent to him that counseleth
thee. For how manie are the chances of Sion? Take comfort for the
sorrowe of Ierusalem. 21 For thou seest that our sanctification is made
desert, and our altar is throwen downe, and our temple is destroyed, 22
and our psalter is humbled, and hymne is silent, and our exultation is
dissolued, and the light of our candelsticke is extinguished, and the
arke of our testament is taken for spoyle, & our holie thinges are
contaminated, and the name that is inuocated vpon vs, is almost
prophaned: and our children haue suffred contumelie, and our Priestes
are burnt, & our Leuites are gone into captiuitie, & our virgins are
defloured, and our wiues haue suffered rape, and our iust men are
violently taken, and our litle ones are lost, and our yong men are in
bondage, and our valiants are made impotent: 23 and that which is
greatest of al, the seale of Sion, because she is vnsealed of her
glorie: For she is also deliuered into the handes of them that hate vs.
24 Thou therfore shake of thy great heauines, and lay away from thee
the multitude of sorrowes, that the Strong may be propicious to thee
agayne, and the Highest wil geue thee rest, rest from thy labours. 25
And it came to passe, when I spake to her, her face did shine suddenly,
and her shape, and her visage was made glistering, so that I was
afrayde excedingly at her, & thought what this thing should be. 26 And
Behold, suddenly she put forth a great sound of a voyce ful of feare,
that the earth was moued at the womans sound. And I saw: 27 and behold,
the woman did no more appeare vnto me, but a citie was built, & a place
was shewed of great fundations: and I was afrayd, & crying with a loude
voyce I sayd: 28 Where is Vriel the Angel, that from the beginning came
to me? for he made me come in multitude in excesse of this minde, and
my end is made into corruption, & my prayer into reproch. 29 And when I
was speaking these thinges, behold he came to me, and sawe me. 30 And
behold I was layd as dead, & my vnderstanding was alienated, and he
held my right hand, and strengthned me, & set me vpon my feete, & sayd
to me: 31 What ayleth thee? and why is thy vnderstanding, and the sense
of thy hart trubled, & why art thou trubled? And I sayd: 32 Because
thou hast forsaken me, and I in dede haue done according to thy wordes,
& went out into the field: & behold, I haue seene, & doe see that which
I cannot vtter. And he sayd to me: 33 Stand like a man, & I wil moue
thee. And I sayd: 34 Speake thou my Lord in me, forsake me not, that I
die not in vaine: 35 because I haue seene thinges that I knew not, & I
doe heare thinges that I know not. 36 Or is my sense deceiued, & doth
my soule dreame? 37 Now therfore I besech thee, that thou shew vnto thy
seruant concerning this trance. And he answered me, & sayd: 38 Heare
me, and I wil teach thee, and wil tel thee of what thinges thou art
afrayd: because the Highest hath reuealed vnto thee manie mysteries. 39
He hath seene thy right way, that without intermission thou was
forrowful for thy people, and didst mourne exceedingly for Sion. 40
This therfore is the vnderstanding of the vision which appeared to thee
a litle before. 41 The woman whom thou sawest mourning, thou beganst to
comfort her. 42 And now thou seest not the forme of the woman, but
there appeared to thee a citie to be built. 43 And because she tolde
thee of the fal of her sonne, this is the interpretation. 44 This woman
which thou sawest, she is Sion, and wheras she told thee of her, whom
now also thou shalt see, as a citie builded. 45 And whereas she told
thee, that she was barren thirtie yeares: for the which there were
thirtie yeares, when there was not yet oblation offered in it. 46 And
it came to passe after thirtie yeares, Salomon built the citie, and
offered oblations: then it was, when the barren bare a childe. 47 And
that which she sayd vnto thee, that she nourished him with labour, this
was the habitation in Ierusalem. 48 And wheras she sayd to thee, that
my sonne comming into the bryde chamber dyed, and that a fal chanced
vnto him, this was the ruine of Ierusalem that is made. 49 And behold,
thou hast seene the similitude of her: and because she lamented her
sonne, thou beganst to comfort her: and of these thinges that haue
chanced, these were to be opened to thee. 50 And now the Highest seeth
that thou wast sorie from the hart: and because with thy whole hart
thou sufferest for her, he hath shewed thee the clearnes of her glorie,
and the fayrenes of her beautie. 51 For therfore did he say to thee,
that thou shouldest tarie in a field where house is not built. 52 For I
knew that the Highest beganne to shew thee these thinges: 53 therfore I
sayd vnto thee, that thou shouldest goe into a field, where is no
fundation of building. 54 For the worke of mans building could not be
borne in the place, where the citie of the Highest began to be shewed.
55 Thou therfore feare not, neither let thy hart dread: but goe in, and
see the beautie, and greatnes of the building, as much as the sight of
thyne eyes is capable to see: 56 & afterward thou shalt heare as much,
as the hearing of thyne eares is capable to heare. 57 For thou art
blessed aboue manie, and art called with the Highest as few. 58 And to
morrow night thou shalt tarie here: 59 and the Highest wil shew thee
those visions of the thinges on high, which the Highest wil doe to them
that inhabite vpon the earth in the later dayes. 60 And I slept that
night, and the other next, as he had sayd to me.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 11

An eagle appeareth to Esdras coming forth of the sea, with three
heades, and twelue winges: sometimes one reigning in the world,
sometimes an other, but euerie one vanisheth away. 36. A lion also
appeareth coming forth of the wood, to suppresse the eagle.

AND I sawe a dreame, & behold an eagle came vp out of the sea: which
had twelue winges of fethers, and three heades. 2 And I saw, and behold
she spred her winges into al the earth, and al the windes of heauen
blew vpon her, and were gathered together. 3 And I saw, and of her
fethers sprang contrarie feathers, and they became litle winges, and
smale. 4 For her heades were at rest, and the midle head was greater
then the other heades, but she rested with them. 5 And I saw, and
behold the eagle flew with her winges, and reigned ouer the earth, and
ouer them that dwel in it. 6 And I saw, that al thinges vnder heauen
were subiect to her, and no man gaynesayd her, no not one of the
creature that is vpon the earth. 7 And I saw, and behold the eagle rose
vp vpon her talons, and made a voice with her winges, saying: 8 Watch
not al together, sleepe euerie one in his place, & watch according to
time. 9 But let the heades be preserued to the last. 10 And I saw, and
behold the voice came not out of her heades, but from the middes of her
bodie. 11 And I numbered her contrarie winges, and behold they were
eight. 12 And I saw, and behold on the right side rose one wing, and
reighned ouer al the earth. 13 And it came to passe, when it reigned,
an end came to it, and the place therof appeared not: and the next rose
vp, & reigned, that held much time. 14 And it came to passe, when it
reigned, & the end of it also came, that it appeared not as the former.
15 And behold, a voice was sent forth to it, saying: 16 Heare thou that
hast held the earth of long time. Thus I tel thee before thou beginne
not to appeare. 17 None after thee shal hold thy time, no nor the halfe
therof. 18 And the third lifted vp it selfe, and held the principalitie
as also the former: and that also appeared not. 19 And so it chanced to
al the other by one & by one to haue the principalitie, & agayne to
appeare nowhere. 20 And I saw, and behold in time the rest of the
winges were sent vp on the right side, that they also might hold the
principalitie: and of them there were that held it, but yet forthwith
they appeared not. 21 For some also of them stoode vp, but they held
not the principalitie. 22 And I saw after these thinges, and behold the
twelue winges, and two litle winges appeared not: 23 and nothing
remayned in the bodie of the eagle but two heades resting, and six
litle winges. 24 And I saw, and behold from the six litle winges two
were diuided, and they remayned vnder the head, that is on the right
side. For foure taried in their place. 25 And I saw, and behold the
vnderwinges thought to set vp them selues, and to hold the
principalities. 26 And I saw, and behold one was set vp, but forthwith
it appeared not. 27 And they that were second did sooner vanish away
then the former. 28 And I saw, and behold the two that remayned,
thought with them selues that they also would reigne: 29 and when they
were thincking thereon, behold one of the resting heades, which was the
midde one awaked, for this was greater then the other two heades. 30
And I saw that the two heades were complete with themselues. 31 And
behold the head with them that were with him turned, and did eate the
two vnderwinges that thought to reigne. 32 And this head terrified al
the earth, & ruled in it ouer them that inhabite the earth with much
labour, and he that held the dominion of the whole world aboue al the
winges that were. 33 And I saw after these thinges, and behold the
midle head sodenly appeared not, as did the winges. 34 And there
remained two heads, which reigned also themselues ouer the earth, and
ouer them that dwelt therein. 35 And I saw, and behold the head on the
right side deuoured that which was on the left. 36 And I heard a voice
saying to me, Looke against thee, and consider what thou seest. 37 And
I saw, & behold as a lion raysed out of the wood roaring: and I saw
that he sent out a mans voyce to the eagle. And he spake saying. 38
Heare thou, and I wil speake to thee, and the Highest wil say to thee:
39 Is it not thou that hast ouercome of the foure beastes, which I made
to reigne in my world, and that by them the end of their times might
come? 40 And the fourth coming ouercame al the beastes that were past,
and by might held the world with much feare, and al the world with most
wicked laboure, and he inhabitied the whole earth so long time with
deceipte. 41 And thou hast iudged the earth not with truth. 42 For thou
hast afflicted the meeke, and hast trubled them that were quiet, and
hast loued lyers, & hast destroyed their habitations that did
fructifie, and hast ouerthrowen their walles that did not hurt thee. 43
And thy contumelie is ascended euen to the Highest, and thy pride to
the Strong. 44 And the Highest hath looked vpon the proud times: and
behold they are ended, and the abominations therof are accomplished. 45
Therfore thou eagle appeare no more, and thy horrible winges, & thy
litle winges most wicked, and thy heades malignant, and thy talons most
wicked, and al thy bodie vayne, 46 that al the earth may be refreshed,
and may returne deliuered from thy violence, and may hope for his
iudgement, and mercie that made it.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 12

The eagle vanisheth away, 5. Esdras prayeth, 10. and the former visions
are declared to him.

AND it came to passe, whiles the lyon spake these wordes to the eagle:
I saw, 2 and behold the head that had ouercome, and those foure winges
appeared not which passed to him, and were set vp to reigne: and their
reigne was smal, and ful of tumult. 3 And I saw, and behold they
appeared not, and al the bodie of the eagle was burnt, & the earth was
afrayd excedingly, and I by the tumult and traunce of minde, and for
great feare awaked, and sayd to my spirit: 4 Behold thou hast geuen me
this, in that, that thou searchest the wayes of the Highest. 5 Behold
yet I am wearie in minde, and in my spirit I am very feeble, and there
is not so much as a litle strength in me for the great feare, that I
was afrayd of this night. 6 Now therfore I wil pray the Highest, that
he strengthen me euen to the end. 7 And I sayd: Lord Dominatour, if I
haue found grace before thine eyes, and if I am iustified before thee
aboue manie, and if in deede my prayer be ascended before thy face, 8
strengthen me, and shew vnto me thy seruant the interpretation, and
distinction of this horrible vision, that thou mayst comfort my soule
most fully. 9 For thou hast counted me worthie to shew vnto me the
later times. And he sayd to me: 10 This is the interpretation of this
vision. 11 The eagle which thou sawest coming vp from the sea, this is
the kingdom which was sene in a vision to Daniel thy brother. (Dan 7:7)
12 But it was not interpreted to him, therfore I do now interprete it
to thee. 13 Behold the dayes come, and there shal rise a kingdon vpon
the earth, and the feare shal be more terrible then of al the kingdomes
that were before it. 14 And there shal twelue kinges reigne in it, one
after an other. 15 For the second shal beginne to reigne, and he shal
continew more time then the rest of the twelue. 16 This is the
interpretation of the twelue winges which thou sawest. 17 And the voice
that spake which thou heardst, not coming forth of her heads, but from
the middes of her bodie, 18 this is the interpretation, that after the
time of that kingdom shal rise no smal contentions, and it shal be in
danger to fal: and it shal not fal then, but shal be constituted againe
according to the beginning therof. 19 And wheras thou sawest eight
vnderwings cleauing to the wings therof, 20 this is the interpretation,
eight kinges shal arise in it, whose times shal be light, and yeares
swift, and two of them shal perish. 21 But when the middest time
approcheth, foure shal be kept til a time, when the time therof shal
beginne to approch to be ended, yet two shal be kept to the end. 22 And
wheras thou sawest three heads resting, 23 this is the interpretation:
in her last dayes the Highest wil rayse vp three kingdoms, and wil cal
backe manie thinges into them, and they shal rule ouer the earth, 24
and them that dwel in it, with much labour aboue al them that vvere
before them. For this cause they are called the heads of the eagle. 25
For these shal be they that shal recapitulate her impieties, and that
shal accomplish her last thinges. 26 And wheras thou sawest a greater
head not appearing, this is the interpretation therof: that one of them
shal dye vpon his bed, and yet with torments. 27 For the two that shal
remayne, the sword shal eate them. 28 For the sword of one shal deuoure
him that is with him: but yet this also at the last shal fal by the
sword. 29 And wheras thou sawest two vnderwings passing ouer the head
that is on the right side, 30 this is the interpretation: these are
they whom the Highest hath kept to their end, this is a smal kingdom,
and ful of truble. 31 As thou sawest the lyon also, whom thou sawest
awaking out of the wood, and roaring, and speaking to the eagle, and
rebuking her, and her iniustices by al his wordes as thou hast heard:
32 this is the wynde which the Highest hath kept vnto the end for them,
and their impieties: and he shal rebuke them, and shal cast in their
spoyles before them. 33 For he shal sette them in iudgment aliue: and
it shal be, when he hath reproued them, then shal he chastise them. 34
For the rest of my people he shal deliuer with miserie, them that are
saued vpon my borders, and he shal make them ioyful til the end shal
come, the day of iudgment, wherof I haue spoken to thee from the
beginning. 35 This is the dreame which thou sawest, and these be the
interpretations. 36 Thou therfore only hast bene worthie to know this
secrete of the Highest. 37 Write therfore in a booke al these thinges
which thou hast sene, and put them in a hidden place: 38 and thou shalt
teach them the wise men of thy people, whose harts thou knowest able to
take, and to kepe these secretes. 39 But doe thou stay here yet other
seuen dayes, that there may be shewed thee whatsoeuer shal seme good to
the Highest to shew thee. 40 And he departed from me. And it came to
passe, when al the people had heard that the seuen dayes were past, and
I had not returned into the citie, and al gathered them selues together
from the least vnto the greatest: & came to me, & spake to me saying:
41 What haue we sinned to thee, or what haue we done vniustly against
thee, that leauing vs thou hast sitten in this place? 42 For thou alone
art remayning to vs of al peoples, as a cluster of grapes of the
vineyard, and as a candle in a darke place, and as an hauen and shippe
saued from the tempest. 43 Or are not the euiles that chance,
sufficient for vs? 44 If then thou shalt forsake vs, how much better
had it bene to vs, if we also had bene burnt with the burning of Sion?
45 For we are not better then they that dyed there. And they wept with
a lowd voice. And I answered them, and sayd: 46 Be of good chere
Israel, and be not sorowful thou house of Iacob. 47 For there is
remebrance of you before the Highest, and the Strong hath not forgotten
you in tentation. 48 For I haue not forsaken you, neither did I depart
form you: but I came into this place, to pray for the desolation of
Sion, and to seeke mercie for the low estate of your sanctification. 49
And now goe euery one of you into his house, and I wil come to you
after these dayes. 50 And the people departed, as I sayd to them, into
the citie: 51 but I sate in the fielde seuen dayes, as he commanded me:
and I did eate of the flowers of the field only, of the herbes was my
meate made in those dayes.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 13

A vision of a winde (as it first semed, but) in dede, v. 3. of a man:
5. strong against the enimies: 21. with the interpretation.

AND it came to passe after seuen dayse, and I dreamed a dreame in the
night. 2 And behold there rose a winde from the sea, that trubled al
the waues therof. 3 And I saw, and behold that man grew strong with
thousandes of heauen: and when he turned his countenance to consider,
al thinges trembled that were sene vnder him: 4 and whersoeuer voyce
proceded out of his mouth, al that heard his voices begane to burne, as
the earth is quiet when it feeleth the fire. 5 And I saw after these,
and behold a multitude of men was gathered together, of whom there was
no number, from the foure windes of heauen, to fight against the man
that was come vp out of the sea. 6 And I saw, and behold he had grauen
to himself a great mountaine, & he flew vpon it. 7 And I sought to see
the countrie, or the place whence the mountaine was grauen, & I could
not. 8 And after these thinges I saw, and behold al that were gathered
to him, to ouerthrowe him, feared exceedingly, yet they were bold to
fieght. 9 And behold as he sawe the violence of the multitude that
came, he lifted not vp his hand, nor held sword, nor anie warlyke
instrument but only as I saw, 10 that he sent forth out of his mouth as
it were a blaste of fire, and from his lippes a spirit of flame, & from
his tongue he sentforth sparkles & tempests, and al thinges were
mingled together with this blast of fire, & spirit of flame, &
multitude of tempests. 11 And it fel with violence vpon the multitude,
that was prepared to fight, and burned them al, that suddenly there was
nothing sene of an innumerable multitude, but only dust, & the sauour
of smoke: and I saw, and was afrayd. 12 And after these thinges I saw
the man himself descending from the mountaine, and calling to him an
other peaceable multitude, 13 and there came to him the countenance of
manie men some reioycing, and some sorrowing: and some bond, some
bringing of them them that were offered. And I was sicke for much
feare, and awaked, and sayd. 14 Thou from the beginning hast shewed thy
seruant these meruelous thinges, and hast counted me worthie that thou
wouldest receiue my petition. 15 And now shew me yet the interpretation
of this dreame. 16 For as I thinke in my iudgement, woe to them that
were leaft in those dayes: & much more woe to them that were not leaft.
17 For they that were not leaft, were sorrowful. 18 I vnderstand now
what thinges are layde vp in the later dayes, and they shal happen to
them, yea and to them that are leaft. 19 For therefore they came into
great dangers, and manie necessities, as these dreames do shew. 20 But
yet it is easier, aduenturing to come into it, then to passe, as a
cloud from the world, and vow to see the thinges that happen in the
later time. And he answered me, and sayd: 21 Both the interpretation of
the vision I wil tel thee: and also concerning the thinges that thou
hast spoken I wil open to thee. 22 Wheras thou speakest of them that
were leaft, this is the interpretation. 23 He that taketh away danger
at that time, he hath garded himself. They that haue fallen into
danger, these are they that haue workes, and fayth in the Strongest. 24
Know therefore that they are more blessed which are leaft, then they
that are dead. 25 These are the interpretations of the vision, wheras
thou sawest a man coming from the hart of the sea, 26 the same is he
whom the Highest preserueth much time, which by himself shal deliuer
his creature: and he shal dispose them that are leaft. 27 And wheras
thou sawest proceede out of his mouth, as it were winde, and fire, and
tempest: 28 and wheras he held no sworde, nor warlike instrument: for
his violence destroyed the multitude that came to ouerthrow him: this
is the interpretation. 29 Behold the dayes come, when the Highest shal
begin to deliuer them, that are vpon the earth: 30 and he shal come in
excesse of minde vpon them that inhabit the earth. 31 And one shal
thinke to ouerthrow an other: one citie an other citie, one place an
other place, and nation against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
(Matt 24 / Luke 21) 32 And it shal be, when these thinges shal come to
passe, and the signes shal happen, which I shewed thee before: and then
shal my sonne be reueled, whom thou sawest, as a man coming vp. 33 And
it shal be when al nations shal heare his voice: and euery one in his
countrie shal leaue their warre, that they haue toward each other: 34
and an innumerable multitude shal be gathered in one, as willing to
come to ouerthrow him. 35 But he shal stand vpon the top of mount Sion.
36 And Sion shal come, and it shal be shewed to al prepared and
builded, as thou sawest the mountaine to be grauen without handes. 37
And the same my sonne shal reproue the thinges that the gentils haue
inuented, these their impieties which came nere to the tempest, because
of their euil cogitaitons, and torments wherewith they shal begin to be
tormented. 38 Which were likened to the flame, and he shal destroy them
without labour by the law that was likened to the fyre. 39 And wheras
thou sawest him gathering vnto him an other peaceable multitude. 40
These are the ten tribes, which were made captiue out of their land in
the dayes of Osee the King, whom Salmanasar the King of the Assyrians
led captiue: and he transported them beyond the riuer, and they were
transported into an other land. (4 Kings 17) 41 But they gaue
themselues this counsel, to forsake the multitude of nations, and to
goe forth into a farther countrie, where mankind neuer inhabited. 42 Or
there to obserue their ordinances, which they had not kept in their
countrie. 43 And they entred in by the narrow entrances of the riuer
Euphrates. 44 For the Highest then wrought them signes, and stayed the
vaines of the riuer til they passed. (Ex 14 / Jos 3) 45 For by that
countie was a great way to goe, of one yeare and a half: for the
countrie is called Arsareth. 46 Then did they inhabite there til in the
later time: and now againe when they beginne to come, 47 againe the
Highest shal stay the vaines of the riuer, that they may passe: for
these thou sawest a multitiude with peace. 48 But they also that were
leaft of the people, these are they that be within my border. 49 In
shal come to passe therefore, when he shal begine to destroy the
multitude of these nations, that are gathered, he shal protect them
that haue ouercome the people: 50 and then shal he shew them very manie
wonders. 51 And I sayd: Lord dominatour, shew me this, why I saw a man
comming vp from the hart of the sea, and he sayd to me: 52 As thou
canst not either search these thinges, or know what thinges are in the
depth of the sea: so can not any man vpon the earth see my sonne, or
them that are with him, but in the time of a day. 53 This is the
interpretation of the dreame which thou sawest, and for the which thou
only art here illuminated. 54 For thou hast leaft thyne owne law, and
hast bene occupied about my law, and hast sought it. 55 For thou hast
disposed thy lyfe in wisdom, and thyne vnderstanding thou hast called
mother: 56 and for this I haue shewed thee riches with the Highest. For
it shal be after other three dayes, I wil speake other thinges to thee,
and I wil expound to thee weightie and meruelous thinges. 57 And I went
forth, and passed into the fielde, much glorifying & praising the
Highest for the meruelous thinges that he did by time. 58 And because
he gouerneth it, and the thinges that are brought in times, & I sate
there three dayes.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 14

God appeareth in a bush, 6. reuealing some thinges to be published, and
some thinges to be hid. 10. As the world waxeth old, al thinges become
worse. 27. The people of Israel are vngratful. 32. Al shal be iudged in
the Resurrection according to their deedes.

AND it came to passe the third day, and I sate vnder an oke. 2 And
behold a voice came forth against me out of a bush, and sayd: Esdras,
Esdras: and I sayd: Loe here I am Lord. And I arose vpon my feete. And
he sayd to me: 3 Reueling I was reueled vpon the bush, and spake to
Moyses, when the people serued in AEgypt, (Ex 3) 4 and I sent him, and
brought my people out of AEgypt, and brought him vpon mount Sina, &
held him with me manie dayes. 5 And I told him manie meruelous thinges,
& shewed him the secrets of times, and the end: and I commanded him,
saying: 6 These wordes thou shalt publish abroade, and these thou shalt
hyde. 7 And now to thee I say: 8 The signes which I haue shewed, and
the dreames which thou hast sene, and the interpretations which thou
hast sene, lay them vp in thy hart. 9 For thou shalt be receiued of al,
thou shalt be conuerted the residue with thy counsel, and with the like
to thee, til the times be finished: 10 Because the world hath lost his
youth, and the times draw nere to waxe old. 11 For the world is diuided
by twelue partes, & the tenth part, & half of the tenth part are
passed: 12 and there remaineth hereafter the half of the tenth part. 13
Now therefore dispose thy house, and correct thy people, & comfort the
humble of them, & forsake now corruption, 14 and put from thee mortal
cogitations, and cast from thee humane burdens, and doe from thee now
infirme nature, & lay at one side cogitations most trublesome to thee,
& make speedie transmigration from these times, 15 for the euiles which
thou hast sene to haue chanced now, worse then these wil they doe
againe: (Matt 24 / 1 John 2) 16 for looke how much the world shal
become weake by age, so much shal euiles be multiplied vpon the
inhabitants. 17 For truth hath remoued it self farther of, and lying
hath approched, for now the vision which thou sawest, hasteneth to
come. 18 And I answered, and sayd before thee o Lord: 19 For behold I
wil goe, as thou hast commanded me, & wil rebuke the people that now
is. But them that shal yet be born, who shal admonish? 20 The world
therfore is set in darknes, and they that dwel in it without light. 21
Because thy law is burnt, therefore no man knowth the workes that haue
bene done by thee, or that shal begin. 22 For if I haue found grace
with thee, send the Holie Ghost to me, & I wil write al that hath bene
done in the world from the beginning, the thinges that were written in
thy law, that men may finde the pathe: and they that wil liue in the
later times, may liue. 23 And he answered me, and sayd: Goe gather
together the people, and thou shalt say to them, that they seeke thee
not for fourtie dayes. 24 And doe thou prepare thee manie tables of
boxe, & take with thee Sarea, Dabria, Salemia, Echanus, and Asiel,
these fiue which are readie to write sweeftly. 25 And come hither, & I
wil light in thy hart a candle of vnderstanding, which shal not be put
out til the things be finished, which thou shalt begine to write. 26
And then some thinges thou shalt open to the perfect, some thou shalt
deliuer secretly to the wyse. For to morrow this houre thou shalt
begine to write. 27 And I went as he commanded me, & gathered together
al the people, and sayd: 28 Heare Israel these wordes: 29 Our fathers
were pilgrimes from the beginning in AEgypt, and were deliuered from
thence. (Gen 47) 30 And they receiued the law of life, which they kept
not, which you also after them haue transgressed: (Deut 4 / Acts 7) 31
and the land was geuen you by lotte, and the land of Sion, and your
fathers, and you haue done iniquitie, and haue not kept the wayes which
the Highest commanded you. 32 And whereas he is a iust iudge, he hath
taken from you in time that which he had geuen. 33 And now you are
here, and your brethren are among you. 34 If then you wil rule ouer
your sense, & instruct your hart, you shal be preserued aliue, and
after death shal obtaine mercie. 35 For the iudgement shal come after
death, when we shal returne to lyfe againe: and then the names of the
iust shal appeare, and the dedes of the impious shal be shewed. 36 Let
no man therfore come to me now, nor aske for me vntil fourtie dayes. 37
And I tooke the fiue men, as he commandede me, and we went forth into
the field, and taried there. 38 And I was come to the morrow, & behold
as voice called me, saying: Esdras open thy mouth, and drinke that
which I wil geue thee to drinke. (Ezech 3) 39 And I opened my mouth, &
behold a ful cuppe was brought me, this was ful as it were with water:
but the colour therof like as fire. 40 And I tooke it, and dranke; and
when I had drunken of it, my hart was tormented with vnderstanding, and
wisdome grewe into my brest. For my spirit was kept by memorie. 41 And
my mouth was opened, and was shut no more. 42 The Highest gaue
vnderstanding vnto the fiue men, and they wrote excesses of the night
which were spoken, which they knewe not. 43 And at night they did eate
breade, but I spake by day, & by night held not my peace. 44 And there
were written in the fourtie dayes two hundred foure bookes. 45 And it
came to passe when they had ended the fourtie daies, the Highest spake,
saying: 46 The former thinges which thou hast written, set abrode, and
let the worthie and vnworthiereade: but the last seuentie bookes thou
shalt keepe, that thou mayest deliuer them to the wyse of thy people.
47 For in these is the vaine of vnderstanding, and the fountaine of
wisdome, and the streame of knowledge. and I did soe.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 15

Esdras is bid to denounce, that assuredly manie euiles wil come to the
world. 9. God wil protect his people, the wicked shal be punished, and
lament their final miseries, God reuenging for the good.

BEHOLD speake into the eares of my people the wordes of prophecie,
which I shal put into thy mouth, sayth our Lord: 2 and see that they be
written in paper, because they be faithful and true. 3 Be not afrayd of
the cogitations against thee, neither let the incredulities truble thee
of them that speake. 4 Because euerie incredulous person shal dye in
his incredulitie. 5 Behold I bring in, sayth our Lord, vpon the whole
earth euils, sword, and famine, and death, and destruction. 6 Because
iniquitie hath fully polluted ouer al the earth, and their hurtful
workes are accomplished. 7 Therefore sayth our Lord: 8 I wil not now
kepe silence of their impieties which they doe irreligiously, neither
wil I beare with those thinges, which they practise vniustly. Behold
the innocent & iust bloud crieth to me, & the soules of the iust crie
continually. 9 Reuenging I wil reuenge them, sayth our Lord, and I wil
take al innocent bloud out of them vnto me. (Apoc 6:10 & 19:2) 10
Behold my people is led to slaughter as a flocke, I wil no more suffer
it to dwel in the land of AEgypt. 11 But I wil bring them forth in a
mightie hand and valiant arme, and wil strike with plague as before,
and wil corrupt al the land thereof. 12 AEgypt shal mourne, and
fundations thereof beaten with plague, and with the chastisement which
God wil bring vpon it. 13 The husbandmen that til the ground shal
mourne, because their seedes shal perish by blasting, and haile, and by
a terible starre. 14 Woe to the world and them that dwel therein. 15
Because the sword is at hand and the destruction of them, and nation
shal rise vp against nation to fight, & sword in their handes. (Matt 24
/ Luke 21) 16 For there shal be instabilitie to men, & growing one
against an other they shal not care for their king, & the princes of
the way of their doinges, in their might. 17 For a man shal desire to
go into the citie & can not. 18 Because of their prides the cities shal
be trubled, the houses raised, the men shal feare. 19 Man shal not
pitie his neighbour, to make their houses nothing worth in the sword,
to spoyle their goodes for famine of bread, & much tribulation. 20
Behold, I cal together sayth God, al the kinges of the earth to feare
me, that are from the Orient, & from the South, from the East, & from
Libanus, to be turned vpon themselues, and to render the thinges that
they haue geuen them. 21 As they doe vntil this day to myne elect, so
wil I doe, and render in their bosome. Thus sayth our Lord God: 22 My
right hand shal not spare sinners, neither shal the sword cease vpon
them that shede innocent bloud vpon the earth. 23 Fire came forth from
his wrath, and hath deuoured the fundations of the earth, and sinners
as it were straw set on fire. 24 Woe to them that sinne, and obserue
not my comandmentes, sayth our Lord. 25 I wil not spare them: depart o
children from the powre. Defile not my sanctification: 26 because the
Lord knoweth al that sinne against him; therefore hath he deliuered
them into death and into slaughter. 27 For now are euils come vpon the
world, and you shal tarrie in them. For God wil not deliuer you,
because you haue sinned against him. 28 Behold an horrible vision, and
the face of it from the east. 29 And the nations of dragons of Arabians
shal come forth in manie chariots, & as a winde the number of them is
caried vpon the earth, so that now al doe feare and tremble, that shal
heare them. 30 the Carmonians madde for anger, and they shal goe forth
as wild boares out of the wood, & they shal come with great power, and
shal stand in fight with them, & they shal waste the portion of the
land of the Assirians. 31 And after these thinges the dragons shal
preuaile mindful of their natiuitie, and conspiring shal turne
themselues in great force to pursue them. 32 These shal be trubled and
hold their peace at their force, and shal turne their fete into flight.
33 And from the territorie of the Assirians the besiegers shal beseige
them, and shal consume one of them, and there shal be feare and
trembling in their armie, and contention against their kinges. 34
Behold cloudes from the east, and from the north vnto the south, and
their face very horrible, ful of wrath and storme. 35 And they shal
beate one against an other, and they shal beate downe manie starres,
and their starre vpon the earth, and bloud shal be from the sword vnto
the bellie. 36 And mans dung vnto the camels litter, and there shal be
much feare, and trembling vpon the earth. 37 And they shal shake that
shal see that wrath, and tremble shal take them: and after these
thinges there shal manie showers be moued: 38 from the south, and the
north: and an other portion from the weast. 39 And the windes from the
east shal reuaile vpon it, and shal shut it vp, and the cloudes which
he raised in wrath, and the starre to make terrour to the east winde,
and the west shal be destroyed. 40 And there shal be exalted great and
mightie cloudes ful of wrath, and a starre to terrifie al the earth,
and the inhabitantes therof, and they shal powre in vpon euerie high,
and eminent place a terrible starre, 41 fire, and haile, and flying
swordes, and manie waters, so that al fildes also shal be filled, and
al riuers with the fulnes of manie waters. 42 And they shal throw downe
cities, and walles, and mountaines, and hilles, and the trees of the
woodes, and the grasse of the medowes, and their corne. 43 And they
shal passe constant vnto Babylon, and shal raise her. (Apoc 18) 44 They
shal come together against her, and shal compasse her, and shal power
out the starre, and al wrath vpon her, and the dust and smoke shal goe
vp euen into heauen, and round about shal lament her. 45 And they that
shal remaine vnder her, shal serue them that terified her. 46 And thou
Asia agreeing into the hope of Babylon, and the glorie of her person,
47 woe be to thee thou wretch, because thou art like to her, and hast
adorned thy daughters in fornication, to please & glorie in thy louers,
which haue desired alwayes to fornicate with thee. 48 Thou hast
imitated the odious in al her workes, and in her inuentions: therefore
sayth God: 49 I wil send in euils vpon thee, widowhood, pouertie, and
famine, and sword, and pestilence, to destroy thy houses by violation,
and death, and glorie of thy vertue. 50 As a flower shal be withered,
when the heate shal rise that is sent forth vpon thee, 51 thou shalt be
weakned as a litle poore soule plaged and chastised of wemen, that the
mightie and the louers may not receiue thee. 52 Wil I be zealous
against thee sayth our Lord, 53 vnles thou hadst slayne myne elect at
al times, exalting the slaughter of the handes, and saying vpon their
death, when thou wast drunken. 54 Adorne the beautie of thy
countenance. 55 The reward of thy fornication is in thy bosome,
therefore thou shalt receiue recompence. 56 As thou shalt doe to my
elect, sayth our Lord, so shal God do to thee, and shal deliuer thee
vnto euil. 57 And thy children shal dye for famine: and thou shalt fal
by the sword, and thy cities shal be destroyed, & al thyne shal fal in
the filde by the sword. 58 And they that are in the mountaines, shal
perish, with famine, and shal eate their owne flesh, & drinke bloud,
for the famine of bread and thirst of waters. 59 Vnhappie by the seas
shalt thou come, and againe thou shalt receuie euils. 60 And in the
passage they shal beate against the idle citie, and shal destroy some
portion of thy land, and shal deface part of thy glorie, againe
returning to Babylon ourethrowen. 61 And being throwen downe thou shalt
be to them for stubble, and they shal be to thee fire: 62 and deuoure
thee, and thy cities, thy land, and thy mountaynes, al thy woodes and
fruitful trees they wil burne with fire. 63 Thy children they shal lead
captiue, & shal haue thy goodes for a praye, and the glorie of thy face
they shal destroy.

### The Fourth Book of Esdras Chapter 16

Al are admonished, that extreme calamities shal fal vpon this world,
36. the penitent returning to iustice shal escape, 55. & as al thinges
were made by Gods omnipotent powre at his wil, so al thinges shal serue
to the reward of the blessed, and punishment of the wicked.

VVOE to thee Babylon & Asia, woe to thee AEgypt, and Syria. 2 Gird
yourselues with sackclothes and shirtes of heare, & mourne for your
children, & be sorie: because your destruction is at hand. 3 The sword
is sent in vpon you, and who is he that can turne it away? 4 Fire is
sent in vpon you, and who is he that can quench it? 5 Euiles are sent
in vpon you, and who is he that can repel them? 6 Shal anie man repel
the lion being hungrie in the woode, or quench the fire in stubble,
forthwith when it beginneth to burne? 7 Shal anie man repel the arrow
shot of a strong archer? 8 Our strong Lord sendeth in euiles, and who
is he that can repel them? 9 Fire came forth from his wrath, and who is
he that can quench it? 10 He wil lighten, who shal not feare, he wil
thunder, and who shal not be afrayed? 11 Our Lord wil threaten, and who
shal not vtterly be destroyed before his face? 12 The earth hath
trembled, and the fundations thereof, the sea tosseth vp waues from the
depth, and the floudes of it shal be destroyed, and the fishes thereof
at the face of our Lord, and at the glorie of his powre: 13 because his
right hand is strong which bendeth the bow, his arrowes be sharpe that
are shot of him, they shal not misse, when they shal begine to be shot
into the endes of the earth. 14 Behold euiles are sent, and they shal
not returne til they come vpon the earth. 15 The fire is kindled and it
shal not be quenched, til it consume the fundations of the earth. 16
For as the arrow shot of a strong archer returneth not, so shal not the
euils returne backe, that shal be sent vpon the earth. 17 Woe is me,
woe is me: who shal deliuer me in those dayes? 18 The beginning of
sorrowes and much mourning, the beginning of famine and much
destruction. The beginning of warres and the potestates shal feare, the
beginning of euiles and al shal tremble. 19 In these what shal I doe,
when the euils shal come? 20 Behold famine, and plague, and
tribulation, and distresse are sent al as scourges for amendment, 21
and in al these they wil not conuert themselues from their iniquities,
neither wil they be alwayes mindful of the scourges. 22 Behold, there
shal be good cheape victuals vpon the earth, so that they may thinke
that peace is directly coming toward them, and then shal euiles spring
vpon the earth, sword, famine, and great confusion. 23 For by famine
manie that inhabit the earth shal dye, and the sword shal destroy the
rest that remained aliue of the famine, 24 and the dead shal be cast
forth as dung, and there shal be none to comfort them. For the earth
shal be left desert, and the cities therof shal be throwen downe. 25
There shal not be left a man to til the ground and to sow it. 26 The
trees shal yeeld fruites, and who shal gather them? 27 The grape shal
become ripe, & who shal tread it? For there shal be great desolation to
places. 28 For a man shal desire to see a man, or to heare his voyce.
29 For there shal be leaft ten of a citie, and two of the field that
haue hid themselues in thicke woodes, and cliffes of rockes. 30 As
there are left in the oliuet, and on euerie tree, three of foure
oliues. 31 Or as in a vinyeard when it is gathered there are grapes
left by them, that diligently search the vineyard: 32 so shal there be
left in those dayes three or foure, by them that search their houses in
the sword. 33 And the earth shal be left desolate, and the fildes
thereof shal waxe old, & the wayes thereof, and al the pathes thereof
shal bringforth thornes, because no man shal passe by it. 34 Virgins
shal mourne hauing no bridegromes, wemen shal mourne hauing no
husbandes, their daughters shal mourne hauing no helpe: 35 their
bridegromes shal be consumed in battel, and their husbandes be
destroyed in famine. 36 But heare these thinges, and know them ye
seruantes of our Lord. 37 Behold the word of our Lord, receiue it:
beleue not the goddes of whom our Lord speaketh. 38 Behold the euiles
approch, and slacke not. 39 As a woman with childe when shee bringeth
forth her child in the ninth moneth, the houre of her deliuerance
approching, two or three howres before, paines come about her wombe,
and the infants coming out of her wombe, they wil not tarrie one
moment. 40 So the euiles shal not slacke to come forth vpon the earth,
and the world shal lament, and sorowes shal hold it round about. 41
Heare the word, my people: prepare yourselues vnto the fight, & in the
euiles so be ye as strangers of the earth. 42 He that selleth as if he
should flee, and he that byeth as he that should lose it. 43 He that
playeth the marchant, as he that should take no fruite: and he that
buildeth as he that should not inhabite. 44 He that soweth, as he that
shal not reape: so he also that pruneth a vinyeard, as if he should not
haue the vintage. 45 They that marie so as if they should not get
children, & they that marie not, so as if were widowes. 46 Wherfore
they that labour, labour without cause: 47 for foreners shal reape
their fruites, & shal violently take their goodes, and ouerthrow their
houses, and lead theire children captiue, because in captiuitie, and
famine they beget their children. 48 And they that play the marchantes
by robrie, the longer they adorne their cities and houses, and their
possessions and persons: 49 so much the more wil I be zealous toward
them, vpon their sinnes, sayth our Lord. 50 As a whore enuieth an
honest & very good woman: 51 so shal iustice hate impietie when she
adorneth herselfe, and accuseth her to her face, when he shal come that
may defend him that searcheth out al vpon the earth. 52 Therefore be
not made like to her, nor to her workes. 53 For yet a little whyle &
iniquitie shal be taken away from the earth, & iustice shal reigne ouer
you. 54 Let not the sinner say he hath not sinned: because he shal
burne coales of fire vpon his head, that sayth I haue not sinned before
our Lord God and his glorie. 55 Behold our Lord shal know al the workes
of men, and their inuentions, & their cogitations, and their hartes.
(Eccli 23 / Luke 16) 56 For he sayd: Let the earth be made, and it was
made: let the heauen be made, & it was made. (Gen 1) 57 And by his
worde the starrs were made, & he noweth the number of the starres. (Ps
146:4) 58 Who searcheth the depth and the treasures therof: who hath
measured the sea, & capacitie therof. (Job 38) 59 Who hath shut vp the
sea in the midest of waters, & hath hanged the earth vpon the waters
with his word. 60 Who hath spred heauen as it were a vault, ouer the
waters he hath founded it. 61 Who hath put fountaines of waters in the
desert, and lakes vpon the toppes of mountaines, to send forth riuers
from the high rocke to watter the earth. 62 Who made man & put his hart
in the midds of the bodie, and gaue him spirit, life and vnderstanding.
63 And the inspiration of God omnipotent that made al thinges, and
searcheth al hid thinges, in the secretes of the earth. 64 He knoweth
your inuention, and what you thinke in your hartes sinning, and willing
to hide your sinnes. 65 Wherfore our Lord in searching hath searched al
your workes, and he wil put you al to open shame, 66 and you shal be
confounded when your sinnes shal come forth before men, and the
iniquities shal be they, that shal stand accusers in that day. 67 What
wil you doe? or how shal you hide your sinnes before God and his
Angels? 68 Behold God is the Iudge, feare him. Cease from your sinnes,
and now forget your iniquities to doe them anie more, & God wil bring
you out, and deliuer you from al tribulation. 69 For behold the heate
of a great multitude is kindled ouer you, and they shal take certaine
of you by violence, & shal make the slaine to be meate for idols. 70
And they that shal consent vnto them, shal be to them in derision, and
in reproch, and in conculcation. 71 For there shal be place against
places, and against the next cities great insurrection vpon them that
feare our Lord. 72 They shal be as it were madde sparing no bodie, to
spoyle and waste yet them that feare our Lord. 73 because they shal
waste and spoyle the goodes, and shal cast them out of their houses. 74
Then shal appeare the probation of mine elect, as gold that is proued
by the fire. 75 Heare be beloued, sayth our Lord: Behold the dayes of
tribulation are come: and out of them I wil deliuer you. 76 Doe not
feare, nor stagger, because God is your guide. 77 And he that kepeth my
commandmentes, and precepts, sayth our Lord God: Let not your sinnes
ouerway you, nor your inquities be aduanced ouer you. 78 Woe to them
that are entangled with their sinnes, and are couered with their
iniquities, as a filde is entangled with the wood, & the path therof
couered with thornes, by which no man passeth, & it is closed out, &
cast to be deuoured of the fire.

## Missing Fragment

=Note:= This translation comes from the Latin text, usually printed in 
an appendix to editions of the Vulgate, but these editions miss seventy
verses between 7:35 and 7:36. The missing fragment was discovered in a
Latin manuscript by Robert Lubbock Bensly in 1874. Below is a
translation of this fragment from a revised Authorized Version.
Although often numbered 7:36-7:105, they are here number as A:1-A:70 to
avoid any repetition in chapter:verse designations.

A:1. And the pit of torment shall appear, and over against it shall be
the place of rest: and the furnace of hell shall be shewed, and over
against it the paradise of delight. A:2. And then shall the Most High
say to the nations that are raised from the dead, See ye and understand
whom ye have denied, or whom ye have not served, or whose commandments
ye have despised. A:3. Look on this side and on that: here is delight
and rest, and there fire and torments. Thus shall he speak unto them in
the day of judgement: A:4. This is a day that hath neither sun, nor
moon, nor stars, A:5. neither cloud, nor thunder, nor lightning,
neither wind, nor water, nor air, neither darkness, nor evening, nor
morning, A:6. neither summer, nor spring, nor heat, nor winter, neither
frost, nor cold, nor hail, nor rain, nor dew, A:7. neither noon, nor
night, nor dawn, neither shining, nor brightness, nor light, save only
the splendour of the glory of the Most High, whereby all shall see the
things that are set before them: A:8. for it shall endure as it were a
week of years. A:9. This is my judgement and the ordinance thereof; but
to thee only have I shewed these things. A:10. And I answered, I said
even then, O Lord, and I say now: Blessed are they that be now alive
and keep the statutes ordained of thee. A:11. But as touching them for
whom my prayer was made, what shall I say? for who is there of them
that be alive that hath not sinned, and who of the sons of men that
hath not transgressed thy covenant? A:12. And now I see, that the world
to come shall bring delight to few, but torments unto many. A:13. For
an evil heart hath grown up in us, which hath led us astray from these
statutes, and hath brought us into corruption and into the ways of
death, hath shewed us the paths of perdition and removed us far from
life; and that, not a few only, but well nigh all that have been
created. A:14. And he answered me, and said, Hearken unto me, and I
will instruct thee; and I will admonish thee yet again: A:15. for this
cause the Most High hath not made one world, but two. A:16. For whereas
thou hast said that the just are not many, but few, and the ungodly
abound, hear the answer thereunto. A:17. If thou have choice stones
exceeding few, wilt thou set for thee over against them according to
their number things of lead and clay? A:18. And I say, Lord, how shall
this be? A:19. And he said unto me, Not only this, but ask the earth,
and she shall tell thee; intreat her, and she shall declare unto thee.
A:20. For thou shalt say unto her, Thou bringest forth gold and silver
and brass, and iron also and lead and clay: A:21. but silver is more
abundant than gold, and brass than silver, and iron than brass, lead
than iron, and clay than lead. A:22. Judge thou therefore which things
are precious and to be desired, whatso is abundant or what is rare.
A:23. And I said, O Lord that bearest rule, that which is plentiful is
of less worth, for that which is more rare is more precious. A:24. And
he answered me, and said, Weigh within thyself the things that thou
hast thought, for he that hath what is hard to get rejoiceth over him
that hath what is plentiful. A:25. So also is the judgement which I
have promised: for I will rejoice over the few that shall be saved,
inasmuch as these are they that have made my glory now to prevail, and
of whom my name is now named. A:26. And I will not grieve over the
multitude of them that perish; for these are they that are now like
unto vapour, and are become as flame and smoke; they are set on fire
and burn hotly, and are quenched. A:27. And I answered and said, O thou
earth, wherefore hast thou brought forth, if the mind is made out of
dust, like as all other created things? A:28. For it were better that
the dust itself had been unborn, so that the mind might not have been
made therefrom. A:29. But now the mind groweth with us, and by reason
of this we are tormented, because we perish and know it. A:30. Let the
race of men lament and the beasts of the field be glad; let all that
are born lament, but let the fourfooted beasts and the cattle rejoice.
A:31. For it is far better with them than with us; for they look not
for judgement, neither do they know of torments or of salvation
promised unto them after death. A:32. For what doth it profit us, that
we shall be preserved alive, but yet be afflicted with torment? A:33.
For all that are born are defiled with iniquities, and are full of sins
and laden with offences: A:34. and if after death we were not to come
into judgement, peradventure it had been better for us. A:35. And he
answered me, and said, When the Most High made the world, and Adam and
all them that came of him, he first prepared the judgement and the
things that pertain unto the judgement. A:36. And now understand from
thine own words, for thou hast said that the mind groweth with us.
A:37. They therefore that dwell upon the earth shall be tormented for
this reason, that having understanding they have wrought iniquity, and
receiving commandments have not kept them, and having obtained a law
they dealt unfaithfully with that which they received. A:38. What then
will they have to say in the judgement, or how will they answer in the
last times? A:39. For how great a time hath the Most High been
longsuffering with them that inhabit the world, and not for their
sakes, but because of the times which he hath foreordained! A:40. And I
answered and said, If I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, shew
this also unto thy servant, whether after death, even now when every
one of us giveth up his soul, we shall be kept in rest until those
times come, in which thou shalt renew the creation, of whether we shall
be tormented forthwith. A:41. And he answered me, and said, I will shew
thee this also; but join not thyself with them that are scorners, nor
number thyself with them that are tormented. A:42. For thou hast a
treasure of good works laid up with the Most High, but it shall not be
shewed thee until the last times. A:43. For concerning death the
teaching is: When the determinate sentence hath gone forth from the
Most High that a man should die, as the spirit leaveth the body to
return again to him who gave it, it adoreth the glory of the Most High
first of all. A:44. And if it be one of those that have been scorners
and have not kept the way of the Most High, and that have despised his
law, and that hate them that fear God, A:45. these spirits shall not
enter into habitations, but shall wander and be in torments forthwith,
ever grieving and sad, in seven ways. A:46. The first way, because they
have despised the law of the Most High. A:47. The second way, because
they cannot now make a good returning that they may live. A:48. The
third way, they shall see the reward laid up for them that have
believed the covenants of the Most High. A:49. The fourth way, they
shall consider the torment laid up for themselves in the last days.
A:50. The fifth way, they shall see the dwelling places of the others
guarded by angels, with great quietness. A:51. The sixth way, they
shall see how forthwith some of them shall pass into torment. A:52. The
seventh way, which is more grievous than all the aforesaid ways,
because they shall pine away in confusion and be consumed with shame,
and shall be withered up by fears, seeing the glory of the Most High
before whom they have sinned whilst living, and before whom they shall
be judged in the last times. A:53. Now this is the order of those who
have kept the ways of the Most High, when they shall be separated from
the corruptible vessel. A:54. In the time that they dwelt therin they
painfully served the Most High, and were in jeopardy every hour, that
they might keep the law of the lawgiver perfectly. A:55. Wherefore this
is the teaching concerning them: A:56. First of all they shall see with
great joy the glory of him who taketh them up, for they shall have rest
in seven orders. A:57. The first order, because they have striven with
great labour to overcome the evil thought which was fashioned together
with them, that it might not lead them astray from life into death.
A:58. The second order, because they see the perplexity in which the
souls of the ungodly wander, and the punishment that awaiteth them.
A:59. The third order, they see the witness which he that fashioned
them beareth concerning them, that while they lived they kept the law
which was given them in trust. A:60. The fourth order, they understand
the rest which, being gathered in their chambers, they now enjoy with
great quietness, guarded by angels, and the glory that awaiteth them in
the last days. A:61. The fifth order, they rejoice, seeing how they
have now escaped from that which is corruptible, and how they shall
inherit that which is to come, while they see moreover the straitness
and the painfulness from which they have been delivered, and the large
room which they shall receive with joy and immortality. A:62. The sixth
order, when it is shewed unto them how their face shall shine as the
sun, and how they shall be made like unto the light of the stars, being
henceforth incorruptible. A:63. The seventh order, which is greater
than all the aforesaid orders, because they shall rejoice with
confidence, and because they shall be bold without confusion, and shall
be glad without fear, for they hasten to behold the face of him whom in
their lifetime they served, and from whom they shall receive their
reward in glory. A:64. This is the order of the souls of the just, as
from henceforth is announced unto them, and aforesaid are the ways of
torture which they that would not give heed shall suffer from
henceforth. A:65. And I answered and said, Shall time therefore be
given unto the souls after they are separated from the bodies, that
they may see that whereof thou hast spoken unto me? A:66. And he said,
Their freedom shall be for seven days, that for seven days they may see
the things whereof thou hast been told, and afterwards they shall be
gathered together in their habitations. A:67. And I answered and said,
If I have found favour in thy sight, shew further unto me thy servant
whether in the day of judgement the just will be able to intercede for
the ungodly or to intreat the Most High for them, A:68. whether fathers
for children, or children for parents, or brethren for brethren, or
kinsfolk for their next of kin, or friends for them that are most dear.
A:69. And he answered me, and said, Since thou hast found favour in my
sight, I will shew thee this also: The day of judgement is a day of
decision, and displayeth unto all the seal of truth; even as now a
father sendeth not his son, or a son his father, or a master his slave,
or a friend him that is most dear, that in his stead he may be sick, or
sleep, or eat, or be healed: A:70. so never shall any one pray for
another in that day, neither shall one lay a burden on another, for
then shall all bear every one his own righteousness or unrighteousness.

## Books for Comparison

### The Prophecie of Abdias

ABDIAS borne in Sichem, of the tribe Ephraim, prophecied the same time
with Amos; so briefly that his prophecie is not parted into chapters:
1. against the Idumeans; foreshewing their destruction; 10. for their
perpetual emnitie against the Iewes, and confederacie with the
Chaldees. 17. The captiuitie and relaxation of the Iewes. 19. And
redemption of the whole world by Christ.

THE vision of Abdias. Thus sayth our Lord God to Edom: We haue heard a
bruit from our Lord, and he hath sent a legate to the Gentils: Rise ye,
and let vs arise against him into battel. 2 Behold I haue geuen thee a
litle one in the Gentils: thou art contemptible excedingly. 3 The pride
of thy hart hath extolled thee, dwelling in the clefts of rockes,
exalting thy throne: which sayst in thy hart: Who shal plucke me downe
to the earth. 4 If thou shalt be exalted as an eagle, and if thou shalt
set thy nest among the starres: thence wil I plucke thee downe, sayth
our Lord. 5 If theues had gone in to thee, if robbers by night, how
hadst thou held thy peace. would not they haue stolen thinges sufficent
for themselues. if the grape gathereres had entered in to thee, would
they not haue left thee at the least a cluster. 6 How haue they
searched Esau, haue they sought out his hidden thinges. 7 Euen to the
border haue they cast thee out: al the men of thy league haue mocked
thee: the men of thy peace haue peuailed against thee: they that eate
with thee, shal lay embushments vnder thee: there is no wisedom in him.
8 Why, shal not I in that day, sayth our Lord, destroy the wise out of
Idumea, and prudence from the mount of Esau, 9 And thy valients of the
South shal feare, that man may perish from the mount of Esau. 10 For
the slaughter, and for the iniquitie against thy brother Iacob,
confusion shal couer thee, and thou shalt perish for euer. 11 In the
day when thou stoodest against him, when strangers tooke his armie, and
foreners entered his gates, and vpon Ierusalem cast lotte: thou also
wast as one of them. 12 And thou shalt not dispise in the day of thy
brother, in the day of his peregrination: and thou shalt not reioyce
ouer the children of Iuda, in the day of their perdition: & thou shalt
not magnifie thy mouth in the day of distresse. 13 Neither shalt thou
enter the gate of my people in the day of their ruine: neither shalt
thou also dispise in his euils in the day of his distruction: and thou
shalt not be sent out against his armie in the day of his destruction.
14 Neither shalt thou stand in the outgoings to kil them that flee: and
thou shalt not shut vp his remnant in the day of tribulation. 15
Because the day of our Lord is at hand vpon al nations: as thou hast
done, so shal it be done to thee: thy retribution he wil returne vpon
thine owne head. 16 For as you haue drunke vpon my holie mount, shal al
Gentils drinke continually: & they shal drinke, and swallow vp, and
they shal be as though they were not. 17 And in mount Sion shal be
saluation, and it shal be holie: and the house of Iacob shal possesse
those that had possessed them. 18 And the house of Iacob shal be a
fyre, and the house of Ioseph a flame, and the house of Esau stubble:
and they shal be kindled in them, and shal deuoure them: and there shal
be no remaynes of the house of Esau, because our Lord hath spoken. 19
And they that are toward the South, shal inherite the mount of Esau,
and they in the champaine countries, Philisthiims: and they shal
possesse the region of Ephraim, and the region of Samaria: and Beniamin
shal possesse Galaad. 20 And the transmigration of this host of the
children of Israel, al places of the Chananeits euen to Sarepta: and
the transmigration of Ierusalem, that is in Bosphorus, shal possesse
the cities of the South. 21 And sauiours shal ascend into mount Sion to
iudge the mount of Esau: and the kingdom shal be to our Lord.

### The Catholike Epistle of Iude the Apostle

He exhorteth them to stand to their old faith, shevving them by
examples, that it is damnable not to continue and be constant: 8
inueighing against the lecherie, blasphemie, apostasie, banketing of
the heretikes, 14 and that their damnation vvas long foretold. 17
Catholikes therfore to be vnmoueable, to reproue the obstinate, to
recouer al not desperate, to confirme the vveake, and to liue them
selues vertuously and vvithout mortal sinne, vvhich by Gods grace they
may doe.

IVDE the seruant of IESVS Christ, and brother of Iames: to them that
are in God the Father beloued, and in IESVS Christ preserued, and
called. 2 Mercie to you, and peace and charitie be accomplished. 3 My
deerest, taking al care to vvrite vnto you of your common saluation, I
thought it necessarie to vvrite vnto you: beseeching you to contend for
the faith once deliuered to the sainctes. 4 For there are certaine men
secretely entred in (vvhich vvere long ago prescribed vnto this
iudgement) impious, transferring the grace of our God into riotousnes,
and denying the onely Dominator, and our Lord IESVS Christ. 5 But I
vvil admonish you, that once knovv al things, that IESVS, sauing the
people out of the land of AEgipt, secondly destroied them vvhich
beleeued not. 6 But the Angels vvhich kept not their pricipalitie, but
forsooke their owne habitation, he hath reserued vnder darkenesse in
eternal bondes vnto the iudgement of the great day. 7 As Sodom and
Gomorrhe, and the cities adioyning in like maner hauing fornicated, and
going after other flesh, vvere made an example, sustaining the paine of
eternal fire. 8 In like maner these also defile the flesh, and despise
dominion, & blaspheme maiestie. 9 Vvhen Micheal the Archangel,
disputing vvith the Diuel, made altercation for the body of Moyses: he
durst not inferre iudgment of blasphemie, but said, Our Lord ‘commaund’
thee. 10 But these, vvhat things so euer certes they are ignorant of,
they blaspheme: and vvhat things so euer naturally, as dumme beastes,
they knovv, in those they are corrupted. 11 Vvo vnto them, ‘vvhich’
haue gone in the vvay of Cain: and vvith the errour of Balaam, haue for
revvard povvred out them selues, and haue perished in the contradiction
of Core. 12 These are in their bankets, spottes, feasting together
vvithout feare, feeding them selues, cloudes vvithout vvater vvhich are
caried about of vvindes, trees of autumne, vnfruitful, tvvise dead,
plucked vp by the rootes, 13 raging vvaues of the sea, foming out their
ovvne confusions, vvandering starres: to vvhom the storme of darkenesse
is reserued for euer. 14 And of these propheceied Enoch, the seuenth
from Adam, saying, Behold our Lord is come in his holy thousandes, 15
to doe iudgement against al, and to reproue al the impious, of al the
vvorkes of their impietie vvherby they haue done impiously, and of al
the hard thinges vvhich impious sinners haue spoken against him. 16
These are murmurers, ful of complaintes, vvalking according to their
ovvne desires, and their mouth speaketh pride, admiring persons for
gaine sake. 17 But you my deerest, be mindeful of the vvordes vvhich
haue been spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord IESVS Christ, 18
vvho told you, that in the last time shal come mockers, according to
their ovvne desires vvalking in impieties. 19 These are they vvhich
segregate them selues, sensual, hauing not the Spirit. 20 But you my
deerest, building your selues vpon ‘our’ most holy faith, in the holy
Ghost, praying, 21 keepe your selues in the loue of God, expecting the
mercie of our Lord IESVS Christ vnto life euerlasting. 22 And these
certes reproue being iudged: 23 but them saue, pulling out of the fire.
And on other haue mercie in feare: hating also that vvhich is carnal,
the spotted cote. 24 And to him that is able to preserue you vvithout
sinne, and to sette you immaculate before the sight of his glorie in
exultation in the comming of our Lord IESVS Christ, 25 to the onely God
our Sauiour by IESVS Christ our Lord be glorie and magnificence, empire
and power before al worldes, and novv and for al vvorldes euermore.
Amen.

## Supplemental Material

As recorded in the title, the Douay-Rheims version is a translation
primarily from the Latin Vulgate. A brief selection from the preface to
the 1582 edition explains the reasons for this approach. Together with
the glossary the text shows the translators scholarly motivations, but
also provides a glimpse into the charged climate of the period. The
transcriber hopes he did a tolerable job in transliterating the Greek
words in the preface. The glossary contains words newly used in the
language of the day. Some were later dropped from the Challoner
revision, others have found common usage today.


## The Preface to the Reader

Treating of the causes vvhy this nevv Testament is translated according
to the auncient vulgar Latin text.

THE holy Bible long since translated by vs into English, and the old
Testament lying by vs for lacke of good meanes to publish the vvhole in
such sort as a vvorke of so great charge and importance requireth: vve
haue yet through Gods goodnes at length fully finished for thee (most
Christian reader) all the NEVV TESTAMENT, vvhich is the principal, most
profitable & comfortable peece of holy vvrite: and, as vvel for all
other institution of life and doctrine, as specially for deciding the
doubtes of these daies, more propre and pregnant then the other part
not yet printed.

NOVV TO GIVE thee also intelligence in particular, most gentle Reader,
of such thinges as it behoueth thee specially to knovv concerning our
Translation: Vve translate the old vulgar Latin text, not the common
Greeke text, for these causes.

1. It is so auncient, that it vvas vsed in the Church of God aboue 1300
yeres agoe, as appeareth by the fathers of those times.

2. It is that (by the common receiued opinion and by al probabilitie)
vvhich S. Hierom aftervvard corrected according to the Greeke, by the
appointment of Damasus then Pope, as he maketh mention in his preface
before the foure Euangelistes, vnto the said Damasus: and ‘in Catalogo
in fine,’ and ‘ep. 102.’

3. Consequently it is the same vvhich S. Augustine so commendeth and
allovveth in an Epistle to S. Hierom.

4. It is that, vvhich for the most part euer since hath been vsed in
the Churches seruice, expounded in sermons, alleaged and interpreted in
the Commentaries and vvritings of the auncient fathers of the Latin
Church.

5. The holy Councel of Trent, for these and many other important
considerations, hath declared and defined this onely of al other latin
translations, to be authentical, and so onely to be vsed and taken in
publike lessons, disputations, preachings, and expositions, and that no
man presume vpon any pretence to reiect or refuse the same.

6. It is the grauest, sincerest, of greatest maiestie, least
partialitie, as being vvithout al respect of controuersies and
contentions, specially these of our time, as appeareth by those places
vvhich Erasmus and others at this day translate much more to the
aduantage of the Catholike cause.

7. It is so exact and precise according to the Greeke, both the phrase
and the word, that delicate Heretikes therfore reprehend it of rudenes.
And that it follovveth the Greeke far more exactly then the Protestants
translations, beside infinite other places, we appeale to these. Tit.
3,14. ‘Curent bonis operibus praeesse.’ ‘proissasthai.’ Engl. bib.
1577, ‘to mainteine good vvorks.’ and Hebr. 10, 20. ‘Viam nobis
initiauit,’ ‘enekainisen.’ English Bib. ‘he prepared.’ So in these
vvordes, ‘Iustificationes,’ ‘Traditiones,’ ‘Idola’ &c. In al vvhich
they come not neere the Greeke, but auoid it of purpose.

8. The Aduersaries them selues, namely Beza, preferre it before al the
rest. (Inpraefat. no. Test an. 1556.) And againe he saith, that the old
Interpreter translated very religiously. (Annot. in 1. Luc. v. 1.)

9. In the rest, there is such diuersitie and dissension, and no end of
reprehending one an other, and translating euery man according to his
fantasie, that Luther said, If the vvorld should stand any long time,
vve must receiue againe (which he thought absurd) the Decrees of
Councels, for preseruing the vnitie of faith, because of so diuers
interpretations of the Scripture. And Beza (in the place aboue
mentioned) noteth the itching ambition of his fellovv-translators, that
had much rather disagree and dissent from the best, then seeme them
selues to haue said or vvritten nothing. And Bezas translation it self,
being so esteemed in our countrie, that the Geneua English Testaments
be translated according to the same, yet sometime goeth so vvide from
the Greeke, and from the meaning of the holy Ghost, that them selues
which protest to translate it, dare not folow it. For example, Luc.
3,36. They haue put these wordes, ‘The sonne of Cainan,’ which he
wittingly and wilfully left out: and (Act. 1,14.) they say, ‘Vvith the
vvomen,’ agreably to the vulgar Latin: where he saith, ‘Cum vxoribus,’
‘vvith their vviues.’

10. It is not onely better then al other Latin translations, but then
the Greeke text it self, in those places where they disagree.

The proofe hereof is euident, because most of the auncient Heretikes
were Grecians, & therfore the Scriptures in Greeke were more corrupted
by them, as the auncient fathers often complaine. Tertullian noteth the
Greeke text which is at this day (1 Cor. 15,47) to be an old corruption
of Marcion the Heretike, and the truth to be as in our vulgar latin,
‘Secundus homo de caelo caelestis,’ ‘The second man from heauen
heauenly.’ So reade other auncient fathers, and Erasmus thinketh it
must needes be so, and Caluin him self folovveth in ‘Instit. li. 2. c.
13. parag. 2.’ Againe S. Hierom noteth that the Greeke text (1 Cor. 7,
33) which is at this day, is not the ‘Apostolical veritie’ or the true
text of the Apostle: but that which is in the vulgar Latin, ‘Qui cum
vxore est, solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori, &
diuisus est.’ ‘He that is vvith a vvife, is careful of vvorldly things,
hovv he may please his vvife, and is deuided or distracted.’ The
Ecclesiastical historie called the Tripartite, noteth the Greeke text
that now is (1 Io. 4, 3) to be an old corruption of the auncient Greeke
copies, by the Nestorian Heretikes, & the true reading to be as in our
vulgar Latin, ‘Omnis spiritus qui soluit IESVM, Ex Deo non est.’ ‘Euery
spirit that dissolueth IESVS, is not of God:’ and Beza confesseth that
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical historie readeth so in the Greeke.

But the proofe is more preganant out of the Aduersaires them selues.
They forsake the Greeke text as corrupted, and translate according to
the vulgar Latin, namely Beza and his scholers the English translatours
of the Bible, in these places. Hebr. chap. 9. vers. 1. saying, ‘The
first couenant,’ for that vvhich is in the Greeke. ‘The first
tabernacle.’ vvhere they put, ‘couenant,’ not as of the text, but in an
other letter, as to be vnderstood, according to the vulgar Latin,
vvhich most sincerely leaueth it out altogether, saying, ‘Habuit quidem
& prius iustificationes &c.’ ‘The former also in deede had
iustifications &c.’ Againe, Ro. 11, vers. 21. They translate not
according to the Greek text, ‘Tempori seruientes,’ ‘seruing the time,’
vvhich Beza sayth must needes be a corruption: but according to the
vulgar Latin, ‘Domino seruientes,’ ‘seruing our Lord.’ Againe, Apoc.
11, vers. 2. they translate not the Greeke text, ‘Atrium quod intra
templum est,’ ‘the court vvhich is vvithin the temple:’ but cleane
contrarie, according to the vulgar Latin, vvhich Beza saith is the true
reading, ‘Atrium quod est foris templum,’ ‘the court vvhich is vvithout
the temple.’ Onely in this last place, one English Bible of the yere
1562, folovveth the errour of the Greeke. Againe, 2 Tim. 23 vers. 14.
they adde, ‘but,’ more then is in the Greeke, to make the sense more
commodious and easie, according as it is in the vulgar Latin. Againe,
Ia. 5, 12. they leaue the Greeke, and folovv the vulgar Latin, saying,
‘lest you fall into condemnation.’ “I doubt not (saith Beza) but this
is the true and sincere reading, and I suspect the corruption in the
Greeke came thus &c.” It vvere infinite to set dovvne al such places,
vvhere the Aduersaries (specially Beza) folovv the old vulgar Latin and
the Greeke copie agreable therevnto, condemning the Greeke text that
novv is, of corruption.

## Hard Wordes Explicated

The explication of certaine vvordes in this translation, not familiar
to the vulgar reader, vvhich might not conueniently be vttered
otherwise.

### A

Abstracted. Dravven avvay. [James 1:14]

Acquisition. Getting, purchasing. [Eph 1:14]

Aduent. The comming. [Matt 24:27]

Adulterating. Corrupting. [2 Cor 2:17] The Greeke vvord signifieth to
make commoditie of the vvord of God, as vulgar Vinteners do of their
vvine. Vvhereby is expressed the peculiar trade of al Heretikes, and
exceding proper to the Protestants, that so corrupt Scriptures by
mixture of their ovvne phantasies, by false translations, glosses,
colorable and pleasant commentaries, to deceiue the tast of the simple,
as tauerners and tapsters do, to make their vvines salable by manifold
artificial deceites. The Apostles contrarievvise, as all Catholikes,
deliuer the Scriptures and vtter the vvord of God sincerely and
entirely, in the same sense and sort as the fathers left them to the
Church, interpreting them by the same Spirit by vvhich they vvere
vvritten or spoken.

Agnition. Knovvledge or acknovvledging. [Philemon 1:6]

Allegorie. A Mystical speache, more then the bare letter. [Gal 4:24]
Here vve learne that the holy Scriptures haue beside the litteral
sense, a deeper spiritual and more principal meaning: which is not only
to be taken of the holy vvordes, but of the very factes and persons
reported: both the speaches and the actions being significatiue ouer
and aboue the letter.

Amen. What is it vvhen our Lord saith, Amen, amen? He doth much commend
and vrge the thing he so vttereth, doubling it. Amen in Hebrue
signifieth verum, a truth. [John 8:34]

Anathema. By vse of Scripture is either that vvhich by separation from
profane vse, and by dedication to God, is holy, dreadful, and not
vulgarly to be touched: or contrarievvise, that which is reiected,
seuered or abandoned from God, as cursed and detested, and therfore is
to be auoided. [Rom 9:3]

Archisynagogue. Cheefe gouerner of a Synagogue. [Mark 5:22]

Assist. Signifieth the Angels standing and attending, alvvaies readie
to doe their ministerie. [Luke 1:19]

Assumption. Christs departure out
of this vvorld by his death and Ascension. [Luke 9:51]

Azymes. Vnleauened bread. [Matt 26:17]

### C

Calumniate. By this vvord is signified violent oppression by vvord or
deede. [Luke 3:14]

Catechizeth, and, Catechized. He catechizeth that teacheth the
principles of the Christian faith: and they that heare and learne, are
catechized, and are therfore called often in the Annotations,

Catechumens. [Gal 6:6]

Character. A marke or stampe. [Apoc 13:16]

Commessations. Immoderate bankets, and belly cheere, vvith vvanton
riotousnes. [Gal 5:21]

Condigne. Comparable. [Rom 8:18]

Contristate. This vvord signifieth to make heauie and sad. [Eph 4:30]

Cooperate. Signifieth vvorking vvith others, likevvise Cooperation,
Cooperatours. [Rom 8:28]

Corbana. This Corbana was a place about the Temple, which receiued the
peoples gifts or offerings. [Matt 27:6]

### D

Depositum. The vvhole doctrine of our Christianity being taught by the
Apostles, and deliuered to their successors, and comming dovvne from
one Bishop to an other, is called the Depositum, as it vvere a thing
laid into their hands, and committed vnto them to keepe. Vvhich because
it passeth from hand to hand, from age to age, from Bishop to Bishop
vvithout corruption, change, or alteration, is al one vvith Tradition,
and is the truth giuen vnto the holy Bishops to keepe, and not to lay
men. [1 Tim 6:20] It may signifie also, Gods graces giuen vs to keepe.
A great comfort to al Christians, that euery of their goode deedes and
sufferings for Christ, and al the vvorldly losses susteined for defense
or confession of their faith, be extant vvith God, and kept as
depositum, to be repaied or receiued againe in heauen. [2 Tim 1:12,14]

Didrachme. These didrachmes were peeces of money which they payed for
tribute. [Matt 17:23,24]

Dominical day. Sunday. [Apoc 1:10] It is to be marked, that this holy
day by the Apostles tradition also, vvas named Dominicus dies, our
Lordes day, or the Dominike, vvhich is also an old Ecclesiastical vvord
in our language, for the name Sunday is a heathenish calling, as al
other of the vveeke daies be in our language.

Donaries. Giftes offered to God for his Temple, &c. [Luke 21:5]

### E

Euacuated from Christ. That is, Made voide and hauing no part vvith
him. [Gal 5:4] The scandal of the crosse euacuated, that is, made
voide, cleane taken avvay. [Gal 5:11]

Euangelize. Signifieth such preaching of good tidinges, as concerneth
the Gospel. How is it possible to expresse Euangelizo, but as vve do,
Euangelize? for Euangelium being the Gospel, what is, Euangelizo or to
Euangelize, but to shew the glad tydings of the Gospel, of the time of
grace, of al Christs benefites? Al which signification is lost, by
translating as the English bibles do, “I bring you good tydings.”

Eunuches. Gelded men.

Euro-aquilo. A north-east vvinde. [Acts 27:14]

Exinanited. Abased excedingly. [Phil 2:7]

### G

Gratis. An vsual vvord to signifie, for nothing, freely, for
Godamercie, vvithout desert.

### H

Holocauste. A kinde of sacrifice vvhere al vvas burnt in the honour of
God. [Hebr 10:6]

Hostes. Sacrifices. [1 Cor 10:18]

### I

Inuocated. Called vpon, praied vnto. [Acts 9:21] Hereof vve say,
Inuocation of Saincts, and to inuocate.

Issue. Good euent. [1 Cor 10:13]

Iustice. Taken in the nevv Testament, not as it is contrarie to vvrong
or iniurie, but for that qualitie vvhereof a man is iust and iustified.
[Rom 4:9]

### N

Neophyte. Neophytus is he that vvas lately christened or nevvely
planted in the mystical body of Christ. [1 Tim 3:6]

### P

Paraclete. By interpretation is either a comforter, or an aduocate: and
therfore to translate it by any one of them only, is perhaps to abridge
the sense of this place. [John 14:16]

Parasceue. The Ievves Sabboth-eue, Good friday. [Mark 15:42]
Parasceue is as solemne a word for the Sabboth eue, as Sabboth is for
the Iewes seuenth day, and now among Christians much more solemner,
taken for Good-friday onely. These wordes then we thought it far better
to keepe in the text, and to tel their signification in the margent or
in a table for that purpose, then to disgrace bothe the text and them
with translating them.

Pasche. Easter, and the Paschal lambe. [Luke 22:1]

Pentecost. Vvhitsuntide, &, the space of fiftie daies.

Prefinition. A determination before. [Eph 3:11]

Prepuce. The foreskinne not circumcised, & therfore signifieth the
Gentiles: as circumcision, the Ievves and their state. [Rom 2:25]

Prescience. Foreknovvledge. [Acts 2:23]

Preuaricatour. Transgressor: and preuarication, transgression. [Rom
2:25]

Loaues of Proposition. So called, because they vvere proposed and set
vpon the table in the Temple, before God. [Matt 12:4]

### R

Repropitiate the sinnes. That is, make a reconciliation for them. [Heb
2:17]

Resolution. The separation of the body and the soule, the departing out
of this life. [2 Tim 4:6]

Resuscitate the grace. That is, Raise, quicken, renew and reviue the
grace vvhich othervvise languisheth and decaieth. [2 Tim 1:6]

### S

Sabbatisme. A time of resting and ceasing from labours. [Heb 4:9]

Sacrament. For mysterie. [Eph 1:9]

Sancta Sanctorum. The holie of holies, that is, the inmost and holiest
place of the Ievves Temple, as it vvere the Chauncel. [Heb 9:3]

Superedified. Builded vpon Christ the principal stone. [1 Pet 2:5]

### T

Tetrarch. Gouernour or Prince of the 4 part of a countrie. [Matt 14:1]

Thrones. An higher order of Angels. [Col 1:16]

### V

Victims. Sacrifice. [Acts 7:42]