THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN THE APOSTLE


The Apostle commends Electa and her family for their steadfastness in
the true faith and exhorts them to persevere, lest they lose the reward
of their labours. He exhorts them to love one another. But with
heretics to have no society, even not to salute them. Although this
Epistle is written to a particular person, yet its instructions may
serve as a lesson to others, especially to those who, from their
connections, situation, or condition in life, are in danger of
perversion.


2 John Chapter 1

He recommends walking in truth, loving one another and to beware of
false teachers.

1:1. The Ancient to the lady Elect and her children, whom I love in the
truth: and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth,

The ancient.... That is, the ancient bishop St. John, being the only
one of the twelve apostles then living. To the lady Elect.... Some
conjecture that Electa might be the name of a family, or of a
particular church; but the general opinion is, that it is the proper
name of a lady, so eminent for her piety and great charity, as to merit
this Epistle from St. John.

1:2. For the sake of the truth which dwelleth in us and shall be with
us for ever.

1:3. Grace be with you, mercy and peace from God the Father and from
Christ Jesus the Son of the Father: in truth and charity.

1:4. I was exceeding glad that I found of thy children walking in
truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.

1:5. And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing a new commandment to
thee, but that which we have had from the beginning, that we love one
another.

1:6. And this is charity: That we walk according to his commandments.
For this is the commandment that, as you have heard from the beginning,
you should walk in the same:

1:7. For many seducers are gone out into the world who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a seducer and an antichrist.

1:8. Look to yourselves, that you lose not the things which you have
wrought: but that you may receive a full reward.

1:9. Whosoever revolteth and continueth not in the doctrine of Christ
hath not God. He that continueth in the doctrine, the same hath both
the Father and the Son.

1:10. If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into the house nor say to him: God speed you.

Nor say to him, God speed you.... This admonition is in general, to
forewarn the faithful of the dangers which may arise from a familiarity
with those who have prevaricated and gone from the true faith, and with
such as teach false doctrine. But this is not forbidding a charity for
all men, by which we ought to wish and pray for the eternal salvation
of every one, even of our enemies.

1:11. For he that saith unto him: God speed you, communicateth with his
wicked works.

1:12. Having more things to write unto you, I would not by paper and
ink: for I hope that I shall be with you and speak face to face, that
your joy may be full.

1:13. The children of thy sister Elect salute thee.

